C
1.
O
N
T
E
N
T
PREGNANCY AND OBESITY
S
1
(Dr. C. N. Purandare, Dr. Sonali Deshpande, Dr. Nikhil Purandare )
2.
CRITICAL CARE IN OBSTETRICS
4
(Dr. S. S. Trivedi, Dr. Ratna Biswas)
3.
HEART DISEASE IN PREGNANCY
15
(Dr. Nandita Palshetkar, Dr. Jasmine Lopez, Dr. Richa Jagtap,)
4.
PREGNANCY WITH SURGICALLY
CORRECTED CARDIAC LESIONS
31
(Dr. Manju puri, Dr. Pooja Dwivedi)
5.
ANAEMIA IN PREGNANCY
38
(Dr. Varsha Deshmukh)
6.
THROMBOEMBOLIC DISEASE DURING PREGNANCY
45
(Dr. Kanan Yelikar, Dr. Ashwini Yelikar)
7.
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS IN PREGNANCY
54
(Dr. Sonali Deshpande, Dr. Madhuri Patel, Dr. Khyati Patel)
8.
THYROID DISORDER IN PREGNANCY
59
(Dr. Krishnendu Gupta)
9.
VIRAL INFECTIONS IN PREGNANCY
67
(Dr. Sadhna Tayade)
10. HEPATITIS IN PREGNANCY
73
(Dr. Laxmi Shrikhande, Dr. Nirmala Vaze)
11. LUEKAEMIA IN PREGNANCY
78
(Dr. Anjali Tempe, Dr. Nancy)
12. ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID ANTIBODY SYNDROME
IN PREGNANCY
84
(Dr. Alka Kriplani, Dr. Amol Lunkad)
13. GESTATIONAL DIABETES MELLITUS
88
(Dr. Kamal Deshmukh, Dr. Jitendra K. Deshmukh )
14. TUBERCULOSIS IN PREGNANCY
94
(Dr. P. K. Shah, Dr. Nagendra S. Sardeshpande)
Disclaimer:
The editors and the publishers of the volume claim no responsibility for the views expressed by different authors in their respective chapter.2009-10
2009-10
Management of options
OBESITY AND PREGNANCY
1,2,3
If an obese woman wishes to reduce her weight, she could be encouraged to lose weight
before or after pregnancy.
Dr. C. N. Purandare, MD (BOM), MA Obst. (Ireland), DGO, DFP, D.Obst.RCPI
(Dublin), FICOG, FRCOG (U.K.), FICMCH, PGD,MLS PRESIDENT FOGSI 2009
SECRETARY GENERAL FOGSI 2004 - 2008
Dr. Sonali Deshpande, Associate professor GMCH Aurangabad
Dr. Nikhil Purandare, Specialist Registrar OBGY, Ireland
MD., MRCOG, MRCPI, MICOG, D.G.O.
Dietary manipulation should not be advocated during pregnancy apart from balanced diet,
daily exercise program should be promoted.
During every antenatal visits, weight & B. P. recording with appropriate sized cuff. Obese
women should be evaluated for gestation diabetes at 1st visit. Testing should be repeated in
second & third trimester if previous findings were normal.
Obesity is a modern epidemic. It is remarkable to observe that younger women show the
signs of obesity. RCOG also addressed the problem of obesity of young age.Women should be screened for asymptomatic bacteriuria by culture colony count of clean
catched voided urine.
Most alarming is childhood obesity which is showing significant morbidity. This is due to
plentiful nutrition and less exercise.Screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria, with subsequent treatment, reduces the risk of
pyelonephritis & it's consequences.
It can be very difficult to asses fetal growth well being.
According to the recommendations of WHO
2
2
Overweight is defined as BMI of more than 25 kg/m and Obesity is defined as BMI > 30 kg/m .
The degree of obesity is classified into 3 categories.
2
Grade I (BMI 30-34.9 kg/m )
Grade II (BMI – 35-39 kg/m2)
Grade III (BMI > 40/m2)
Effect of Obesity on reproduction & pregnancy2
Measuring fundal height may be difficult. USG may be untrustworthy if adipose tissue limits
visualization of foetus. There is no simple solution.
A detailed anomaly scan and serum screening for congenital anomalies should be
recommended.
Women with severe obesity(BMI>35kg/m2) with one additional risk factor for hypertensive
disease should be prescribed Aspirin 75mg per day from 12 weeks of gestation.
Labour & Delivery
2. Over weight women are more likely to suffer from problems of infertility.Fetal macrosmia is strongly associated with problems in labour including poor progress as a
result of CPD, Shoulder dystocia and birth asphyxia thus resulting in a poor perinatal
outcome.
3. Obese women have higher incidence of complications like pre-eclampsia, gestational
diabetes and macrosomia.C. section in obese patient
4. There is (threefold) increased risk of miscarriageIn view of modern anaesthesia, there should no longer be a hesitancy to perform a cesarean
section in morbidly obese women.
1. Maternal obesity is associated with basic metabolic disturbance.
5. The chances of operative delivery as well as post operative morbidity are increased.
6. The risk of pre-eclampsia increases (3.5 Vs 13.5%) in obese patient.
7. The risks of thromboembolism (0.05Vs .12%) are higher in incidence as compared to non obese.
8. Increased perinatal mortality (1.4 Vs 5.71%)
9. Obese women are at high risk of cardiovascular disease and D. M.
10. Other problems associated with obesity include gall stones, UTI, thrombophlebitis.
1
Epidural anesthesia is technically possible and is preferred over general anesthesia, at least
in experienced hands.
The use of prophylactic antibiotics during both elective and emergency cesarean section
reduces the risk of maternal wound infection & febrile morbidity.
Additionally prophylactic administration of low molecular weight heparin is recommended,
beginning pre-operatively & continued till the patient is fully ambulatory.
22009-10
2009-10
Type of incision
Pfannestiel incision is preferred due to less post operative pain, early ambulation, more
secure closure & less adipose tissue at the incision site.
CRITICAL CARE IN OBSTETRICS
Dr. S. S. Trivedi, (Director Professor and HOD)
Dr. Ratna Biswas, (Associate Professor)
More ever this incision gives a better cosmetic result.
Potential adverse effects are
Obs & Gynae, Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi
1) Greater chances of infection as this incision is in moist, warm area.
2) Potentially restricted access to the infant & more difficult exposure of upper abdomen.
Use of full thickness or one layer closure (incorporating peritoneum together with rectus
sheath) with nonabsorbable suture material could avoid the problem of wound dehiscence.
Placing surgical drain at the time of closure of the abdomen in obese women is a matter of
debate & no conclusive evidence about how the skin should be closed after c-section.
Postnatal
Complications after abdominal delivery in obese women include wound infection, wound
dehiscence, atlectasis & pulmonary emboli.
Early mobilization with prophylactic anticoagulants appears to improve the outcome.
In newborn infants born to grossly obese women, especially those that are larger than
gestational age, post natal blood sugar level should be monitored during 1st few hours of life.
Conclusion
Obesity in pregnancy is a major predictor of obesity in latter life along with major
complications like Type 2 DM & hypertension & cardiovascular complications1.
Maintaining awareness of the specific medical & obstetric problems associated with obesity
1
will enable the clinician to maximize efforts to improve maternal health & fetal outcome .
References
1.Hajo. I. J. Wildschut, Prepregnancy Antecedents of a High Risk pregnancy, High Risk
20-22
pregnancy Management Options, 3rd Edition .
2.S. Dasgupta, Obesity in Pregnancy, Recent Advances in Obstetrics and Gynecology
3.Philip Baker, Adam Balen, Lucilla Postan et al,obesity and Reproductive Health ,
Consensus Views, RCOG Press.
51-54
.
Importance of critical care in obstetrics can not be overemphasized and it is one of the most
important intervention that helps in reducing maternal mortality. The patients are young and
generally healthy and respond favorably to the timely intensive care. Critical care for the
obstetrical patient is required for acute conditions like amniotic fluid embolism, pulmonary
thromboembolism, acute respiratory distress syndrome, hemorrhagic shock, septic shock,
severe pre-eclampsia/ eclampsia with pulmonary edema, disseminated intravascular
coagulation etc and also for conditions which are pre-existent but get aggravated
by pregnancy like heart disease. A thorough knowledge of the physiological alterations
during pregnancy is important for complete evaluation and management of the critically ill
obstetric patient.
Physiological changes in pregnancy
The cardiovascular alterations begin as early as 5 weeks of gestation. During the course of
pregnancy the plasma volume increases by 30-50% as compared to 20-30% increase in red
cell mass resulting in hemodilution. Cardiac output increases whereas systemic vascular
resistance and pulmonary vascular resistance decrease by 30%. Uterine blood flow by term
reaches around 600 ml/min. Extracellular fluid volume increases by 1-5 litres.
In respiratory system, the important physiological alterations are, a decrease in functional
residual capacity by 18% which is due to the elevation of diaphragm by 4 cm and limitation of
diaphragmatic excursions. Increase in respiratory rate and tidal volume leads to an increase in
minute ventilation by 45%. There is a mild respiratory alkalosis and shift of oxygen
dissociation curve to left which facilitates maternal- fetal oxygen transfer.
The renal changes are predominantly an increase in the glomerular filtration rate and
creatinine clearance. Urinary volume increases while serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen
and uric acid levels fall. Although renin-aldosterone level increase there is a reduced
sensitivity to these vasopressor resulting in decline in systolic and diastolic blood pressure1.
Pregnancy is relatively a hypercoagulable state and there is increase in fibrinogen, Factor II, VII
3
42009-102009-10
and X and decrease in factor XI, XIII levels and platelets though the prothrombin and partial
thromboplastin time remain unaltered. There is slight increase in the white blood cell count.osmotic pressure which pulls water from circulation to the interstitium. Low albumin which
may result from malnutrition, liver disease or renal loss can give rise to pulmonary edema.
Hypoalbuminemia rarely precipitates pulmonary edema on its own but generally
exaggerates edema due to other precipitating factors.
Critical Care Unit
Any serious medical or surgical condition in pregnant women may need critical care. In
addition certain conditions which are specific to pregnancy may require critical care which is
ideally done in a critical care unit which is equipped for providing ventilatory support and
invasive monitoring. Certain hospitals in the USA have an obstetric intermediate care unit
close to the labor wards which function similar to an intensive care unit2. Anaesthesia and
obstetrical services are provided simultaneously by faculty and residents of each department.
Medical and surgical consultancy is sought according to the specific condition being
managed. The nurse patient ratio is 1:1 or 1:2. In most of the hospitals however critically ill
obstetric patients are managed in the general ICU because the volume of obstetric patients
needing such service is not enough to justify separate ICU3. The cost of infrastructure
equipment and staff of ICU run into hundreds of crores.
The percentage of pregnant women needing ICU admission vary between 0.09% to 0.9%4,5.
6,7
The mortality rate is between 12 to 21.6% . The APACHE II (Acute Physiology and Chronic
Health Evaluation) is used for assessment of non pregnant as well as pregnant women who
8
are critically ill . This article will deal with some of the important critical conditions which an
obstetrician has to manage.
Pulmonary edema
It can be of the following types :
1. Hydrostatic pulmonary edema
2. Permeability pulmonary edema
Hydrostatic pulmonary edema includes cardiogenic pulmonary edema or colloid osmotic
pressure related pulmonary edema and certain rare causes like those associated with
negative interstitial pressure such as acute airway obstruction or rapid re-expansion of
pneumothrorax. Iatrogenic causes like excessive intravenous infusion are also included in this
group.
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema may be due to systolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction or
valvular disease.
Normal colloid osmotic pressure is maintained by albumin and globulin which hold water in
the intravascular compartment. It opposes the hydrostatic pressure and interstitial colloid
5
Permeability edema is seen in acute lung injury, ARDS, septic shock, aspiration pneumonitis
etc. It results from opening of the tight junctions in endothelial cells which allows flooding of
the alveolar space with water, proteins and cells from the vascular compartment.
Pulmonary artery wedge pressure of >18 mmHg in hydrostatic pulmonary edema
differentiate it from permeability pulmonary edema.
Pulmonary edema presents with dyspnea, paraoxysmal nocturnal dyspnea or orthopnea.
Examination reveals increased respiratory rate and use of accessory muscles of respiration,
positive hepatojugular reflux, neck vein distention, peripheral edema, third heart sound, and
basal crepitations. Chest x-ray shows perihilar infiltration. Pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas
analysis may reveal hypoxia. Twelve lead ECG and echocardiography are useful noninvasive
tests for evaluation of the cardiovascular system. A Swan ganz catheter may be needed for
monitoring of cardiac output, central venous pressure and pulmonary artery wedge
9
pressure.
Management comprises oxygen supplementation and administration of frusemide and
morphine. Mechanical ventilation is needed if arterial partial pressure of oxygen is low. It
should be maintained above 60 mmHg.
In pulmonary edema associated with pre-eclampsia, antihypertensives like hydralazine,
labetalol, & nicardipine are beneficial. It reduces after load to the heart. NTG is useful when
uncontrolled hypertension is associated with myocardial infarction and unstable angina
although it is rare in pregnancy.
For systolic dysfunction as in cardiomyopathy dobutamine is effective. If hypotension is
associated then dopamine, dobutamine or norepinephrine may be used.
For long term use isosorbide dinitrate is used in systolic dysfunction to reduce preload and
afterload. Following delivery ACE inhibitors can be used. Aldosterone antagonist and blockers
improve survival in congestive heart failure.
Septic Shock
In obstetrics, septic shock may be encountered in puerperal sepsis, chorioamnionitis, septic
abortion and pyelonephritis. Gram negative organisms are causative factor in more than 50%
10
of cases while only 5% are as a result of gram positive organisms. Mortality rate is 40-50% .
62009-10
In the initial phase the clinical presentation is that of tachycardia, hypotension, mental
confusion and flushing of skin. With further progress bradycardia sets in, skin becomes cool
and clammy and cyanosis develop as a result of hypoperfusion.
Initial hemodynamic parameters reveal a decreased systemic vascular resistance and
normal or elevated cardiac output. Later on maldistribution of cardiac output leads to local
10
tissue hypoxia and lactic acidosis and end organ failure . Acute renal failure, ARDS,
thrombocytopenia and consumptive coagulopathy may develop as disease progresses.
Management
Success of treatment depends on early diagnosis and prompt treatment. Aggressive fluid
management with crystalloids or colloids is necessary to mantain a CVP of 8-12 mmHg.
Pulmonary artery catheterization helps in optimal fluid management. If hypotension persists
despite preload correction then vasoactive agents are added to maintain mean arterial
pressure of 67-70 mmHg.11 Packed cell transfusion may be required to maintain hematocrit of
30% or more. Low dose steroids may be useful for countering the inflammatory response but
high dose steroids should be avoided. Source of infection should be eliminated and broad
spectrum antibiotics started depending sensitivity report.
Anticoagulants like recombinant activated protein C has been used in multiorgan
dysfunction but its role is controversial. Mechanical ventilation with positive end expiratory
pressure may be needed if ARDS sets in.
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
According to the American European Consensus Conference ARDS is characterized by :
1.Acute onset
2.PaO2/FIO2 ratio or hypoxia score of 200.
3.Bilateral pulmonary infiltrates on chest x-ray.
4.Pulmonary artery occlusion pressure of 18 mmHg or the absence of clinical evidence of
left atrial hypertension12
Conditions predisposing to development of ARDS in an obstetric patient are-sepsis with
prolonged hypotension as seen in chorioamnionitis, endometritis, pre-eclampsia/ eclampsia,
amniotic fluid embolism, trophoblastic embolism, acute fatty liver of pregnancy, chemical
penumonitis, infective pneumonia, trauma, burns, transfusion related lung injury, tocolytic
pulmonary edema etc.
7
2009-10
It has two phases:
Acute or exudative phase
This is characterized by increased capillary permeability leading to pulmonary edema. In
alveolus the Type I alveolar cells undergo necrosis and sloughing. The alveolar walls become
edematous and some alveoli get compressed, others collapse due to changes in the surface
tension. Hyaline membrane deposits in the alveoli. Microthrombi form in the pulmonary
circulation which exacerbates intrapulmonic shunting of blood. Sometimes macrothrombi
form which cause pulmonary infarction.
Proliferative or fibrosis phase
rd
This phase begins by 3 day and is characterized by proliferation of Type II pneumocytes
which later differentiate into Type I cells. Fibroblasts proliferate in the alveolar spaces which
collapse and merge into large spaces giving a honey- comb appearance. The sequelae of ARDS
is a compromised lung function and sometimes severe chronic debilitating lung disease.
Clinical course
Hypoxemia presents early on in the disease process and rapidly progresses. It is usually
resistant to high concentration of oxygen supplementation because of shunting of blood
from right to left through nonventilated lung segments. It responds to positive end expiratory
pressure (PEEP). The lung compliance is reduced due to diffuse edema and fibrosis leading to
reduced elasticity. Atelectatic lung patches further decrease the lung compliance.
The airway resistance increase due to presence of areas of consolidation which do not
participate in ventilation. High airway pressure are needed to inflate the lungs but caution
should be exercised to prevent the risk of barotrauma.
The dead space increases from .35 in normal to .6 in ARDS patients leading to increased partial
pressure of CO2. Pulmonary hypertension and right sided heart failure may develop
Management
Adequate oxygenation to maintain PaO2 above 60 or oxygen saturation of 90% is essential.
High oxygen concentration of >21% can cause toxicity and should be avoided. Endotracheal
intubation and mechanical ventilation with positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) reduces
right to left shunts across lung by restoring lung functional residual capacity.
Newer techniques like extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) where an artificial
auxillary lung is placed in the vascular circuit allows supplementary pulmonary oxygenation.
This permits the lung to repair itself and with this method hyaline formation may be less.
82009-10
Complications like hemolysis, bleeding and infection may occur.
An improvization over ECMO is the extracorporeal lung assist (ECLA) where emphasis is on
removal of carbondioxide. Both these methods however have not shown any added
12
improvement over mechanical ventilation with PEEP.
Fluid therapy should be optimally managed by pulmonary artery catheterization. It is
important to maintain low pulmonary capillary wedge pressure without reducing cardiac
output to minimize interstitial edema caused by increased capillary permeability.
Artificial surfactants are not beneficial. Nitric oxide inhalation causes local vasodilatation in
well ventilated areas and reduced intrapulmonic shunting but potential toxicity and limited
overall improvement as seen in Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials has limited its use to special
circumstances where other therapies fail.
2009-10
a humoral etiology. Humoral pathways invoking an inflammatory response is also seen in
16
anaphylaxis and septic shock. This inflammatory response leads on to systemic
inflammatory response syndrome and development of multiorgan failure.
AFE is found to be common in patients with history of drug allergy or atopy.
Clinical Presentation
Hypoxia
It is an early feature seen in 93% of patients and results from ventilation perfusion mismatch.
Development of pulmonary edema in the later phase due to increased capillary permeability
may also contribute to development of hypoxia. Neurological damage and hypoxic
encephalopathy may result. Seizures may develop later on.
Amniotic Fluid Embolism (AFE)Hypotension/ Shock
This represents an anaphylactoid reaction to fetal antigens and presents with hypoxia,
13
hypotension, hemodynamic collapse and coagulopathy.Hypotension present early in the course of AFE. Shock is due to cardiogenic left ventricular
failure. Cardiac arrythmias including bradycardia, asystole, ventricular fibrillations and
pulseless electrical activity may develop. Later on both cardiogenic and obstructive factors
are responsible for persistence of shock. Shock is a poor prognostic sign.
Incidence varies from 1:8000 to 1:80,000 pregnancies with mortality rate of 61-86%. The
duration of time between collapse and death is short usually within 5 hours. Neurological
sequelae is common among survivors.14,15
In a study by Clark et al it was seen that amniotic fluid embolism in antenatal patient presents
with convulsion in 30%, fetal tachycardia in 12% and hypotension in 13%. Postpartum AFE
15
presents with coagulopathy in 54% of cases.
Clinical, hematological and hemodynamic parameters of AFE resemble those seen in
anaphylactic and septic shock although cutaneous manifestation and fever are rare.13 Like in
anaphylaxis and septic shock in AFE too entry of foreign protein (fetal origin) results in release
of endogenous mediators. The hemodynamic data interpretation points to a humoral
etiology and not a thromboembolic event.
Pathophysiology
Amniotic fluid enters the maternal venous circulation through veins at placental site or site of
trauma. Placental abruption and rupture of membrane predispose to this condition. In the
past the gold standard of diagnosis of AFE was demonstration of amniotic fluid from
pulmonary artery catheter samples. Although not confirmatory such a finding in the setting
of characteristic clinical findings should raise suspicion to its diagnosis.
Arachidonic acid metabolities may be responsible for the inflammatory response and point to
9
Coagulopathy/ DIC is encountered in 83% patients of AFE and may result from substances
released from amniotic fluid or due to systemic inflammatory response activating the
16
coagulation mechanism .
Diagnosis and Management
It is a clinical diagnosis and should be suspected when sudden profound shock and
cardiovascular collapse develops in a postpartum patient. Arterial Blood Gases (ABG),
electrolytes, CBC, coagulation profile and echocardiography may aid in diagnosis.
Management is supportive. Proper oxygenation, fluid resuscitation and vasopressors are
used to counter hypoxia and shock. DIC is treated with Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP),
cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen. Delivery is indicated to prevent fetal hypoxia as well as facilitate
maternal cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Pulmonary Embolism
Clinically it presents with dyspnea, tachypnea, cough, hemoptysis, tachycardia, pleuritic pain
and hypotension.
Chest x-ray, ECG and ABG are not diagnostic. Definite diagnosis is by pulmonary angiogram.
102009-102009-10
Ventilation perfusion scan and helical CT scan are non invasive tests which help in diagnosis. A
17
highly probable VQ scan report mandates initiation of treatmentThrombocytopenia results from consumption and destruction caused by the fibrin
degradation products.
Heparin remains the mainstay of management. It does not cross the placenta. Initially 5000 -
10,000 U is given as IV bolus followed by 1000 U/hour by infusion. Later on subcutaneous
heparin 5000 U every 4 hourly or 7500 U every 6 hourly can be given18. Complications of
19
heparin therapy include thrombocytopenia and osteoporosis Acute PE is managed by IV
heparin for 5 days followed by subcutaneous heparin or low molecular weight heparin
(LMWH). LMWH is less effective than unfractionated heparin. Treatment should be continued
for 6 weeks. In the postpartum period warfarin can be given.
Unstable pulmonary embolism
It may present as hypotension which is due to right heart strain. It is managed by intravenous
fluids and oxygen supplementation. Vasopressors may be needed to increase systemic blood
flow.
Thrombolysis and embolectomy is the gold standard of management. Drugs like tissue
plasminogen activator and streptokinase is useful for thrombolysis. Inferior vena caval filter is
helpful in recurrent pulmonary embolism or when anticoagulation is contraindicated. It is
preferable to use retrievable filter which can be removed as soon as patient stabilizes
17
otherwise they might perforate aorta and penetrate nearby structures if left for long time
Diagnosis
Elevated fibrin degradation products is sensitive and specific for DIC although values may be
normal in 10-15% of patients. Prolongation of prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin
time occurs only after 40-50% of the clotting factors have been consumed. Clot retraction
time is increased. Platelet count is low.
Management
Heparin is generally not used in obstetric DIC except in case of retained dead fetus where low
dose heparin 5000U is given two times per day in patients with intact circulation. It blocks
consumption of fibrinogen and other clotting factors.
Replacement of platelets and soluble clotting factors is effective in preventing hemorrhage. If
surgery is planned then platelet transfusion is needed if counts are <30000/ cu mm. Fresh
frozen plasma is transfused in bleeding patients with fibrinogen less than 100mg/dl or when
prothrombin and partial thromboplastin time are prolonged. In patients who are not
bleeding and not likely to require surgery, mild to moderate coagulopathy may be simply
10
observed.
Hypovolemic shock
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
It represents a process of intravascular clotting and fibrinolysis. The common triggering
events in obstetrics are placental abruption, amniotic fluid embolism, retained dead fetus and
sepsis.
It is important to differentiate it from dilutional coagulopathy which is seen in massive
obstetric hemorrhage where replacement has been done with red cells and crystalloids
10
leading to deficiency of platelets and clotting factors.
Pathophysiology
It is precipitated by endothelial disruption or by release of tissue thromboplastin into the
circulation. This activates the coagulation cascade- intrinsic or extrinsic. The end result is the
formation of insoluble fibrin. Simultaneously plasminogen is activated into plasmin by tissue
activators which causes breakdown of the fibrin to fibrin degradation products (FDP). FDP
binds with the soluble fibrin monomers to prevent further polymerization. Fibrin which had
formed earlier plugs the microvascular circulation to cause tissue hypoxia and ischemia.
11
Massive hemorrhage leading to volume deficit of more than 25% can lead to hemodynamic
instability since at this level of loss the compensatory mechanisms are unable to maintain
cardiac output and blood pressure. Further hypoxia and acidosis sets in leading to cellular
death and organ ischemia. Hematocrit falls by 3 volume% after 1 litre of blood loss.
Management includes tackling the cause of hemorrhage and starting resuscitative measures
simultaneously. In recent reviews there has been a concern over type of fluid used for
resuscitation. Crystalloids and blood replacement has shown a decreased mortality as
compared to colloids. Acute blood loss should ideally be replaced with whole blood. For
stable patients who do not have massive hemorrhage packed red cells may be used. Both
increase the hematocrit by 3-4 volume % per unit. Component replacement is rarely needed.
Evaluation of platelet count, clotting studies and fibrinogen concentration is essential.
Platelet count in bleeding women should be maintained above 50000/cu mm. A fibrinogen
level of <100mg/dl or prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin time requires fresh
20
frozen plasma transfusion at dose of 10-15 ml/kg
122009-10
Key Points
•
Critical care in obstetrics requires multidisciplinary approach A thorough knowledge of the
patho physiological process and co-relation with the altered physiology in pregnancy is
essential for proper management of the critical condition
2009-10
6.Lapinsky SE, Krczynski K. Critical care in the pregnant patient.Am J Respir Med 1995;
152:427-55.
7.Karnad DR, Lapsia v, Krishnan A, Salvi VS. Prognostic Factors in obstetric patients
admitted to an Indian intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 2004;32:1418-19.
•Septic shock should be aggressively managed by intravascular fluid resuscitation,
elimination of the septic focus and appropriate antibiotics8.Lewinsohn G, Herman A, et al. Critically ill obstetrical patients: Outcome and
predictability. Crit Care Med 1994;22:1412.
•Hypovolemic shock due to obstetric hemorrhage is a common condition and requires
skillful management of the cause along with active resuscitation with crystalloids and
blood9.Mabie WC. Pulmonary edema. In : Critical care obstetrics. 4th edn. Editor Dildy GA,
Wiley:346 352.
•Amniotic fluid embolism, anaphylactoid reaction to fetal antigens, presents with
hypoxia, hypotension, hemodynamic collapse and coagulopathy. Supportive therapy to
correct the hemodynamic collapse and mechanical ventilation to support respiration
is important although prognosis is dismal
•
For pulmonary embolism a high index of suspicion and evaluation of risk factors is
paramount to diagnosis. An abnormal ventilation perfusion scan may aid in diagnosis
although a pulmonary angiography remains the gold standard . Heparin, thrombolytic
agents, IVC filters and embolectomy can be used for treatment depending on the
need of the situation
•
ARDS & DIC may be precipitated by many conditions in pregnancy and should be
managed with assisted ventilation with positive end expiratory pressure and component
therapy respectively.
10. Clark Steven L. Critical care obstetrics. In: Danforth's Obstetrics Gynecology 2003.
Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 9th edn ;461 75.
11. Perez ERF, Salman S, Pendem S, Farmer JC. Sepsis during pregnancy. Crit Care Med
2005;33(10):5286-293.
12. Mason BA. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome and acute respiratory distress
syndrome. In: Critical Care Obstetrics, 4th edn, Editor Dildy GA, Wiley; 43-58.
13. Dildy G A,Clark SL. Anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancy (amniotic fluid embolism). In:
Critical care obstetrics, 4th edn. Editor Dildy GA, Wiley:463-471.
14. Davies S. Obstetrical and Pediatric anesthesia: Amniotic Fluid embolism: a review of
literature. Can J Anesth 2001;48(1):88-98.
15. Clark SL, Hankins G, Dudley DA, et al. Amniotic fluid embolism: analysis of national
registry. Am J Obstet Gynaecol 1995:172:1158-67.
16. Moore J, Baldisseri MR. Amniotic Fluid embolism. Crit Care Med 2005;33(10):S279 S85.
References:
1.Douglas FN, Olson MM. Critical care in obstetrics and gynecology. Crit Care Clin
2003:19:127-149.
2.Zeeman GG, Wendel GD, Cunningham GF. A blueprint for obstetrical care. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2003; 188: 532-36.
3.Pollock WE. Caring for the pregnant and postnatal women in intensive care: what do
we know. Aust crit care 2006;19:54-57.
4.Heinonen s, Tyrvainen E, Saarikoski S et al . Need for maternal critical care in obstetrics: a
population based Analysis. Int J Obstet Anesth2002;11:260-64.
5.Kilpatrick SJ, Mathay MA. Obstetric patients requiring critical care Afive year review.
Chest1992;101:1407-12.
13
17. Stone SE, Morris TA. Pulmonary embolisms during and after pregnancy. Crit Care Med
2005;33(10):S294-99.
18. Gary F Cunningham, Kenneth J Leveno, Bloom SL et al (Eds). Pulmonary embolism . In :
Williams Obstetrics. McGraw-Hill, New York. 22nd ed, 1084-87.
19. Barbour LA, Smith JM, Marlar RA. Heparin level to guide thromboembolism prophylaxis
during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynaecol 1995;173:1869-73.
20. Gary F Cunningham, Kenneth J Leveno, Bloom SL et al (Eds) obstetric hemorrhage. In :
Williams Obstetrics. McGraw-Hill, New York. 22nd ed :809-854.
142009-10
2009-10
Physiological hemodynamic changes during pregnancy
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE IN PREGNANCY
Dr. Nandita Palshetkar, Chairman Perinatology Committee 2004-2008;
Hemodynamic
Parameters
Ivf Specialist
Dr. Jasmine Lopez, Dean Dr. D.Y. Patil Educational Enterprises Pvt Ltd
Dr. Richa Jagtap, Associate Consultant, Bloom Ivf, Dr. D.Y.Patil Hospital
Valvular heart disease is any disease process involving one or more of the valves of the heart
(the aortic and mitral valves on the left and the pulmonary and tricuspid valve on the right).
Valve problems may be congenital (inborn) or acquired (due to another cause later in life)
The presence of valvular heart disease continues to pose a challenge to both, the clinicians
and their pregnant patients. This condition increases the risk of pregnancy to both the
mother and the fetus and requires specific care during the preconception period as well as
during the pregnancy and labor.
Change During
Normal Pregnancy
Blood volume40% - 50%
Heart rate10-15 beats
per minute
Cardiac output30-50% above
baseline
Blood pressure
Change During
Labor and Delivery
¯ 10 mm Hg
1st and 2nd
trimester; slight ¯
3 trimester
Stroke volume
rd
The prevalence and incidence of all heart disease in pregnancy varies from 0.3to 3.5%.
Valvular dysfunction originates from Rheumatic heart disease leading to calcification of the
valves and loss of elasticity leading to dysfunction
Profound hemodynamic alterations occur during pregnancy, labor and delivery, and in the
post–partum period These and other normal
physiological changes pose a substantial
PULMONARY SEMILUNAR
VALVE
AORTIC SEMILUNAR
demand on cardiac function in patients with
VALVE
valvular heart disease and may require the
CORONARY
ARTERY
initiation or titration of cardio-vascular
TRICUSPID
medication to manage volume overload,
VALVE
hypertension or arrhythmias .
The marked hemodynamic changes explain
the characteristic signs and symptoms that
occur during pregnancy, which mimic those
of heart disease .
Systemic vascular
resistance
Additional 50%
Change During
Postpartum
Initially with in
Preload, then ¯ with
diuresis
Returns to baseline
(300-500 cc per
contraction)
¯
¯
Returns to baseline
Predictors of Cardiac complications-
•Prior heart failure, transient ischemic attack, arrhythmia or stroke
•Baseline NYHA Class III or greater or cyanosis
•Mitral valve area <2 cm2
•Peak left ventricular outflow tract gradient >30 mm Hg
•Ventricular ejection fraction < 40%
FIBROUS
SKELETON
BICUSPID
VALVE
15
162009-10
The risk index comprising of the factors shown here, accurately predicts the woman's chance
of having adverse cardiac and perinatal outcome. Classification of Valvular Heart Lesions
According to Maternal, Fetal, and Neonatal Risk.
Table 1. Classification of Valvular Heart Lesions According to Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Risk.*
Low Maternal and Fetal RiskHigh Maternal and Fetal RiskHigh Maternal Risk
Asymptomatic aortic stenosis with
A low mean outflow gradient
(<50 mm Hg) in the persence
of normal left ventricular
systolic functionSevere aortic stenosis with or
without symptomsReduced left ventricular
systolic function
(Left ventricular
ejection
Fraction <40%)
Aortic regurgitation of NYHA
class I or II with normal left
ventricular systolic function
Mitral regurgitation of NYHA
class I or II with normal left
ventricular systolic function
Mitral-valve prolapse with no
mitral regurgitation or with
mild-to-moderate mitral
regurgitation and with normal
left ventricular systolic function
Mild-to-moderate mitral stenosis
(mitral-valve area> 1.5 cm2,
gradient<5 mm Hg) without
severe pulmonary
hypertension
Aortic regurgitation with NYHA
class III or IV symptoms
Mitral stenosis with NYHA
class III or IV symptoms
Mitral regurgitation with NYHA
class III or IV symptoms
Previous heart failure
Previous stroke or
transient ischemic
attack
High Neonatal Risk
Maternal age <20 yr
or>35 yr
Use of anticogulant
therapy through
out pregnancy
Multiple gestations
Aortic-valve disease, mitral-valve
disease, or both, with left
ventricular systolic dysfunction
(ejection fraction < 0.40)
Maternal cyanosis
Reduced functional status
(NYHA class III or IV)
Mild-to-moderate pulmonary-
valve stenosis
* Derived from ACC/AHA Guidelines6 and Siu et al.
NYHA denotes New York Heart Association.
Management
Whenever possible, symptomatic or severe valvular lesions should be addressed and
rectified before conception and pregnancy.
Women with pre-existing cardiac lesions should receive pre - conception counseling on
maternal and fetal risks, potential long term maternal morbidity and mortality and
counseling on contraception.
17
Preconception workup
•Detailed history and careful cardiac examination with assessment of functional
capacity
•12 lead ECG
•Echocardiogram
•Doppler study
•In patients with impaired or questionable functional capacity an exercise tolerance test
is advocated, with measurement of oxygen consumption.
•Risk of pregnancy on basis of evaluation discussed with patient and family by both
cardiologist and obstetrician
Smoking during
pregnancy
Aortic-valve disease, mitral-valve
disease, or both, resulting in
severe pulmonary hyper
tension (pulmonary pressures)
>75% of systemic pressures)
4,5
2009-10
Ante partum and Peripartum care
Joint Obstetric and Cardiologic evaluation ensures a thorough understanding of the disease
as well as the physiology of pregnancy.
Frequency of ANC visits depends on the type and severity of the disease and patient's
condition but the standard first trimester visit is a must, followed by the second trimester 3D
screening. The frequency of visits should increase in the third trimester when the
hemodynamics undergo a major change .When drug therapy indicated, the smallest
therapeutic dose known to be safe for the fetus should be used Prophylaxis against
rheumatic fever is advocated.
Signs and Symptoms
The most frequent symptom of heart disease is breathlessness which should be assesed
keeping in mind that it is a variable feature of normal pregnancy.
The New York Heart Association (NYHA) classification is based on limitation of physical
activity.
Class 1 - No limitation of physical activity.
Class 2 - Slight limitation of physical activity .Ordinary physical activity causes
fatigue, dyspnoea.
Class 3 - Marked limitation of physical activity. Less than normal physical activity causes
fatigue, dyspnoea.
182009-10
Class 4-Symptoms of cardiac insufficiancy and anginal syndrome present at rest.
Syncope occurs particularly in the middle trimester, especially in severe AS.
Chest pain may be present in severe AS
Physical sign
Peripheral pulse is increased in volume
2009-10
Table 2. Fetal Effects of, Maternal Indications for, and Risks Associated with Drugs Used in the
Treatment of Maternal Valvular Heart Disease
Drug
DiureticsFetal EffectsIndication in Pregnant Patients
with Valve Disease
FurosemideIncreased urinary sodium
and potassium levelsTo decrease congestion associated
with valvular heart disease
Possible decreased heart rate,
possible lower birth weightHypertension, supraventricula arrhythmias,
to control heart rate in woman with clinically
significant mitral stenosis
The heart apex beat is more force fulAntihypertensive agents
Premature atrial and ventricular ectopic beats are commonBeta-blockers
Neck vein pulsations are more prominent
Oedema
Murmers
As seen all these signs are misleading in a pregnant pt as they are present often in normal
pregnancy also, but the presence of increased right atrial pressure(>10mmhg) and apex
beat >2cm outside midclavicular line is considered definitely abnormal. Ejection systolic
murmer can be heard in 96%of apparently normal women. .Venous hum- continuous
murmurs are usually audible in pregnant state. The significant murmurs are-
1.Pansystolic murmur
2.Late systolic murmur
3.Ejection systolic murmurs louder than grade3/6
Medical Management
Methyldopa
Vasodilator agentsNo major adverse effectsAngiotensin-converting-
enzyme inhibitorsUrogenital defects, death,
intrauterine growth retardationNot indicated during pregnancy
and should be discontinued
HydralazineNo major adverse effectsFor vasodilation in cases of aortic
regurgitation and ventricular dysfunction
NitratesPossible bradycardiaRarely used to decrease venous congestion
Hypertension
Anticoagulant and antithrombotic agnets
Hemorrhage, developmental
abnormalities used between
wk 6 and wk 12 of gestationFor anticoagulation of mechanical heart valves,
valvular heart disease with associated atrial
fibrillation during wk 12-36 of pregnancy
Unfractionated heparinHemorrhage,
no congential defectsFor anticoagulation of mechanical heart valves,
valvular heart diseases with associated atrial
fibrillation during wk 6-12 and after wk 36
of pregnancy
Low-molecular-weight
heparinHemorrhageNot currently indicated during pregnancy
AspirinAntiarrhythmic agentsHemorrhage, prolongation
of labor, low birth weight
(when taken in high doses)Low dose aspirin (81 mg/day) occasionally use
d as an adjunct in patients with pervious embolic
events or prosthetic-valve thrombosis
DigoxinNo major adverse effectsFor suppression of supraventricular arrhythmias
AdenosineNo major adverse effectsFor immediate conversion of supraventricular
arrhythmias
Warfarin
•Most patients with valvular heart disease can be managed medically by the following
guidelines•Reassurance, Restricted physical activity•Salt restricted dietQuinidineHigh doses may be oxytocicOccassionally used for suppression
of atrial or ventricular arrhythmias
•Diuretics, Daily weight record Tranquilisers and sedativesProcainamideNo major adverse effectsOccasionally used for suppression
of atrial or ventricular arrhythmias
•Treat anaemia, hypertension and inter current infectionamiodarone•Digitalis, beta-blockers, adenosine, sotalol lidocaine and procaineamide can be safely
used for arrhythmiasHypothyroidism, intrauterine
growth retardation, premature
birthRarely used during pregnancy because of
side effects; may be used to suppress atrial
or ventricular arrhythrnias in high-risk patients
•ACE inhibitors, Angiotensin receptor blockers and Amiodarone avoided during pregnancy
19
Derived from: Uri Elkayam,journal of the American College of Cardiology, 2005 vol46,
PA: Elsevier 2005
202009-10
2009-10
Percutaneous balloon mitral valvuloplasty
Surgical management
•Valvotomy•DecalcificationProsthetic valves
•Complex mitral valve repair•Are of two types
•Mechanical
•Biological
Second trimester is the safe and preferred period of pregnancy for a repair. Valvular Heart
Disease is the most common indication for cardiovascular surgery during pregnancy. The
procedure is relatively safe with maternal mortality of 3 to 6% and fetal mortality of 20 to
30% . Maternal deaths are reported in 9% of valvular surgical procedures .
Strategies to repair a defective valve :
Many factors determine the choice of prosthetic heart valves in patients of childbearing age
i.e risk of reoperation in cases of bioprosthetic valves versus the risk of bleeding, thrombo
embolism and valve thrombosis with mechanical valves, as well as effects on fetus.
Pregnancy is tolerated well by patients with prosthetic valves .
Biological valves
Commissurotomy
A surgical procedure performed to open a stenotic
(narrowed) valve. A stenotic valve restricts the flow of blood.
A scalpel incision widens the valve.
Homografts: Preserved human valves are used in a minority of patients.
Xenografts:
Artificial Heart Valve
Normal valve
Healthy valve
Diseased
valve
1.Porcine models: Carpentier-Edwards valves, Hancock II and Mosaic valves
2.Bovine Pericardial valves : Perimount series valves. Stentless porcine valves : Edwards
Prima Plus, Medtronic Freestyle, and Toronto SPV valve.
Mechanical valves
Starr Edwards
Caged ball valve
Stenotic valve
Tilting disc valve
Bileaflet valve
Surgical correction
Artificial valve insertion
21
222009-10
Anticoagulant therapy in pregnancy
Table 2. Recommendations of the Seventh ACCP Consensus Conference on
Antithrombotic therapy for Prophylaxis in Patients With Mechanical Heart Valves
1.Aggressive adjusted-dose UFH, given every 12 h subcutaneously throughout pregnancy; mid-interval
activated partial thromboplastin time maintained at >2 x control levels, or anti-Xa heparin level maintained
at 0.35 to 0.70 IU/ml.
2009-10
Contraception
•
Permanent methods:
• Vasectomy
• Tubal ligation
•
Temporary Methods :
• IUD : excellent and safe method-meticulous care and prophylactic antibiotics at time
of insertion
OR
2. LMWH throughout pregnancy, in doses adjusted according to weight or as necessary to maintain a 4-h
postinjection anti-Xa heparin lelevel of about 1.0 IU/ml
• COCS: contraindicated
• POP : pills, patches and vaginal rings can be used
OR
UFH or LMWH, as above, until the 13th week, change to warfarin until the middle of the third trimester, then
restart UFH or LMWH therapy until deliveryLabor and Delivery
Reprinted, with permission, from Bates et al60.•ACCP=American College of Chest Physicians; LMWH= low molecular weight heparin; UFH=unfractionated
heparin.The timing and mode of delivery is to be discussed jointly by the obstetrician,
cardiologist and obstetric anaesthesiologist.
•All the patients with NYHA classes III & IV and some from class II hospitalised prior to
delivery to achieve optimal conditions
Before delivery, optimization of left atrial pressure is achieved by diuretics and
reduction of heart rate with beta blockers. Antibiotic prophylaxis is essential.
Indications for Anticoagulation
1.Patients with mechanical heart valves2.Chronic atrial fibrillationMode of Delivery
3.DVT and PEPatients are preferably kept in left lateral position. Vaginal delivery with shortened second
stage with regional anesthesia preferred.
•Warfarin: Causes fetal skeletal stippling, craniofacial deformities, microcephaly, optic
atrophy, limb defects. Exposure in first trimester causes dorsal or ventral midline
dysplasia Warfarin embryopathy consists of mid face and nasal hypoplasia, optic
atrophy, hypoplasia of digits, stippled epiphysis (chondrodysplasia punctata), mental
illness,Epidural analgesia : provides pain relief, minimizes intrapartum fluctuations in cardiac
output and lowers left atrial and pulmonary artery pressures
•
It also causes 1st trimester abortions, still births, neonatal deaths and fetal
hemorrhages.
• bleeding- 2 to 4 % in patients on anticoagulants
•Avoid ergots and oxytocics
•CS performed for obstetric reasons . No place for trial / prolonged and difficult labor
•Hemodynamic monitoring with Swan Ganz catheter during delivery and several hours
into peurperium in patients with heart failure / moderate to severe mitral stenosis / left
ventricular dysfunction / PAP > 50 mm Hg
•Vaginal delivery preferred by Hammed et al and Silversides et al - 90 to 95 %
•Incidence of CS 20 % - Bhatla et al
Monitoring for 7-10 days in the post partum period in high risk patients
23
242009-10
2009-10
Mitral StenosisAlready Pregnant Patients
Mitral stenosis is most common rheumatic valvular lesion seen in pregnancy. 25% of
patients become symptomatic for first time during pregnancy. Mortality depends on the
severity of the lesion. Mortality less than 1 % with minimal symptoms and about 5% with
severe mitral stenosis•Aims to reduce heart rate and left atrial pressure. Risk of maternal events include
progression of heart failure with need for PBMV or cardiac surgery – strongly associated
with severity of mitral stenosis and NYHA functional class before pregnancy
•Use of beta mimetic tocolytics contraindicated
•Mild mitral stenosis: Medical treatment
•Reassurance, limitation of physical activity, salt restricted diet , treatment or correction
of anaemia ,hypertension, infection, obesity, arrhythmias, and thyrotoxicosis,. Digoxin,
diuretics and beta blockers .Beta blockers recommended if pulmonary artery pressure
>50 mm Hg by echo - attenuates the heart rate and increases the diastolic filling period
•Atrial fibrillation may result in rapid deterioration with the risk of embolism and stroke .
Hence prompt treatment with anti coagulants, beta blockers, cardioversion, digoxin
and diuretics is a must
Valvuloplasty
Grades of severity
2
•Mild : MVA 1.5-2cm
•Moderate : MVA 1-1.5 cm2
•Severe : MVA <1cm2
•Critical :MVA <0.6cm
•Higher incidence of morbidity with moderate to severe MS
2
Hammed et al, Barbosa et al & Silversides et al
Indications for surgical intervention
Management of MS1. MVA <1cm2
Management of Mitral stenosis is complex because of the potential impact on the fetus,
related to drug therapy and exposure to ionizing radiation associated with diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures such as cardiac catherization or PBMV, as well as the effect of
anesthesia and cardiopulmonary bypass in cases of cardiac surgery.2. Cardiac failure before / in early pregnancy
Patients are divided into 2 groups :
A procedure to improve blood flow through a
narrow valve. A catheter is threaded to the valve
through a hole temporatily created in the septal
wall and inflated.
Mitral valve
3. Uncontrollable haemoptysis
4. Patients not responding to medical
treatment
Balloon
catheter
1) Non pregnant and contemplating pregnancy
2) Patients already pregnant
Non Pregnant Group
•Severe mitral stenosis (MVA <1cm2) - PBMV•Moderate mitral stenosis-patients asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic-Medical
therapyObservations
(If patient not suitable for PBMV)•Mean valve area increased from 0.75 -1.2 cm2 to 1.7-2.2cm2 (Uri Elkayam)
Mild mitral stenosis have favourable pregnancy outcome•Maternal Mortality 1.96% and perinatal mortality 1.96%-Algotar et al(52 cases)
•Maternal Morbidity 3.5 % and perinatal mortality 7.1 %-Kore et al (26 cases )
•PBMV : gives good results in young patients with non-calcific valves without sub valvular
thickening or significant MR
•
25
Percutaneous Balloon Mitral Valvuloplasty
262009-10
•Performed at end of second trimester or early third trimester
•Complications few and include transient AF, blood loss, cardiac tamponade and
worsening of MR. Minimal fetal risk are there because of ionizing radiation
•Because of high risk to the fetus, mitral valve repair or replacement considered only in
cases of severe MS who are refractory to optimal medical therapy and are not suitable
candidates for PBMV
•
Open heart surgery avoided in pregnancy because of morbidity and mortality to the fetus
(especially in the first trimester )
2009-10
treated medically : close monitoring, bed rest, O2, beta blockers, diuretics(if volume overload
present)
Severe AS
•Results in hemodynamic and symptomatic deterioration
•Associated with significant maternal morbidity and unfavourable fetal outcome
•Increased risk of left sided failure, angina, dyspnoea in second or third trimester
•Maternal mortality high - 17 %
Labor ManagementManagement
Before delivery, optimization of left atrial pressure achieved by diuretics and reduction of heart
rate with beta blockers. Antibiotic prophylaxis•If symptoms severe and refractory to medical treatment and patient cannot be delivered
MTP (if patient symptomatic before end of first trimester )
•Valve repair/ balloon valvuloplasty / valve replacement carries a mortality of 11%
•High incidence of complications with moderate to severe AS Hameed et al , Silversides et al
Mode Of Delivery
Vaginal delivery with shortened second stage with regional anesthesia preferred.
Epidural analgesia : provides pain relief, minimizes intrapartum fluctuations in cardiac output
and lowers left atrial and pulmonary artery pressuresLabor management
•Avoid ergots and oxytocics•Hemodynamic monitoring , Vaginal delivery with shortened second stage under
•CS performed for obstetric reasons . No place for trial / prolonged and difficult labor••Hemodynamic monitoring with Swan- Ganz catheter during delivery and several hours
into peurperium in patients with heart failure / moderate to severe mitral stenosis / left
ventricular dysfunction / PAP > 50 mm HgRegional anesthesia used with caution to prevent fall in systemic vascular resistance
(poorly tolerated )
•When intervention seems indicated and fetal maturity confirmed-patient delivered and
valve repair / replacement after delivery
•Vaginal delivery preferred by Hammed et al and Silversides et al - 90 to 95%•General anesthesia and CS allows optimal hemodynamic control .
•Incidence of CS 20 % - Bhatla et al
Mitral Regurgitation(MR)
Etiology : Rheumatic / MVP
Aortic Stenosis
2
Etiology: congenital, rheumatic mild to moderate stenosis with valve area >1cm : pregnancy is
tolerated well
Before pregnancy: If MR is severe: mitral valve repair
Mitral regurgitation with MVP: Pregnancy is uneventful. Serious complications like endocarditis,
arrhythmias and cerebral ischemia may occur
Severe stenosis : balloon valvuloplasty / valve repair before pregnancy. Maximize cardiac output
by avoiding exercise, vasodilators and diureticsIf left ventricular function good : pregnancy tolerated well
Medical managementComplications: New onset atrial fibrillation or severe hypertension can result in pulmonary
edema or cardiac decompensation
Asymptomatic patients with mild to moderate stenosis with preserved left ventricular function
27
282009-10
2009-10
Management of MRTricuspid Regurgitation
Asymptomatic patients : No treatmentIsolated tricuspid regurgitation : managed conservatively, protect against diuretic induced
hypoperfusion
•
Symptomatic patients with left ventricular dysfunction with hemodynamic abnormalities
and symptoms of heart failure : Medical treatment : Diuretics, digoxin, vasodilators,
organic nitrates and hydralazine.
•
Surgery indicated for severe symptomatic patients : valve repair-good option. Valve
replacement- last resort
In presence of impaired right ventricular function, the increased stroke volume is poorly
tolerated, resulting in worsening of symptoms
Pregnancy is tolerated well.
•
Aortic regurgitation
Management of valvular heart disease during pregnancy is challenging. A thorough
knowledge of the expected natural history of the disease during pregnancy and of the
possible treatment options is required for clinical decision making
•Etiology : congenital / rheumatic / endocarditis / dilated aortic annulus•Commonly seen with mitral valve diseaseLooking Back into the Future
•AR without left ventricular dysfunction - tolerated wellRecent advances
•AR with left ventricular dysfunction-medical management : close monitoring, limitation
of physical activity, salt restriction, diuretics, digoxin, beta blockers, vasodilators -
hydralazine and nitratesResearchers are continuously exploring possible causes and treatments for heart valve
diseases as well as the long term effects of those treatments. Recent findings include.
•
Stem cell research for congenital heart disease .
•Surgery delayed if possible until after delivery•
Robotically – assisted surgery for mitral valve repair
•Hemodynamic monitoring during labor•
Cells from patients blood vessels grown over pig/human cadaver valves
•Patients tolerate bradycardia poorly . Heart rate maintained around 80 -100 bpm•
Percutaneous trans catheter heart valve implantation
•No prophylactic surgery for asymptomatic patients with severe MR / AR with normal left
ventricular function who are contemplating pregnancy.•
Medical therapy with Statins and ACE inhibitors
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: All pictures courtesy google.
Pulmonary StenosisReferences
Etiology : Congenital : Obstruction at valvular / subvalvular / supravalvular levels /1.Treatment: In non pregnant symptomatic patients with severe PS: balloon valvuloplasty PS,
even when severe is well tolerated during pregnancy in contrast to severe MS and severe AS.
The severity has no impact on maternal or fetal outcomeEssop MR, Sareli P. Rhenumatic valvular disease and pregnancy. In: Elkayam U, gleicher N,
Editors. Cardiac Problems in Pregnancy. New York, NY: Woley-Liss 1998:55-60
2.Warnes Ca, Elkayam U. Congenital heart disease in pregnancy. In: Elkayam U, Gleicher N,
editors. Cardiac Problems in Pregnancy. New York, NY: Wiley-Liss, 1988:39-55
•If patient asymptomatic/ mildly symptomatic : no surgery3.•Cases with right heart failure - balloon valvuloplasty indicatedBonow RD, Braumweld E. Valvular heart disease. In: Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow RO,
Braunwald E, editors. Heart Disease. edition. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier 2005;1553-621
•Vaginal Delivery tolerated well and recommended in majority of patients4.Uri Elkayam,journal of the American College of Cardiology, 2005 vol46,PA: Elsevier 2005
5.Sharon C. Reimold, John D.Rutherford:Valvular heart disease in pregnancy. N ENGL J MED
349;1 July 2003
6.Siu SC, Sermer M, ColmanJM, et al. Prospective multicenter study of pregnancy outcomes
in women with heart disease. Circulation 2001;104:515-21
29
302009-10
PREGNANCY WITH SURGICALLY CORRECTED
CARDIAC LESION
Dr. Manju Puri, Professor
Dr. Pooja Dwivedi, Post Graduate
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Lady Hardinge Medical College, New Delhi
With wider availability and improved techniques of cardiac surgery obstetricians are
increasingly required to supervise the pregnancies of women with corrective cardiac
surgery. The cardiac defects requiring surgery can be congenital or acquired. Most of the
clinically significant congenital cardiac lesions are repaired early in life and these women
usually behave as non cardiac patients during pregnancy. The acquired cardiac lesions are
consequent to rheumatic heart disease involving the valves. These defects are treated with
either valvotomy or valve replacement. The women with valve replacement present specific
management difficulties during pregnancy. For optimum management of these women,
combined effort of a team comprising of an obstetrician, cardiologist, anesthesiologist and
pediatrician is required.
It is essential that a woman with surgically corrected heart lesion undergoes a thorough
preconception evaluation, receives appropriate preconception counseling and is closely
supervised during her pregnancy and labour.
Pre pregnancy evaluation
This plays an important part in ensuring a successful pregnancy outcome and involves
reviewing the old records of the woman and assessing her functional cardiac status. It is
important to know the type of cardiac lesion, type of corrective procedure done, type of
valve used if any, level of cardiac functional status and the drugs the women is taking.
For the assessment of functional cardiac status the woman is subjected to various
investigations like ECG, X-ray chest, 2D echocardiography and stress echocardiography.
Certain hematological tests like hemoglobin, hematocrit, and total and differential
leucocyte count are carried out to rule out anemia or any infection which if present should be
corrected prior to her planning a pregnancy. In women on anticoagulant drugs, coagulation
profile and platelet count is done.
A general medical examination including a dental check up is indicated. All the drugs which
the woman is taking need to be reviewed for the risk of teratogenesis associated with some
and the need of switching over the woman to safer drugs once she conceives.
31
2009-10
Preconception counseling
This includes counseling the couple regarding the maternal and fetal risks associated with
pregnancy so that the couple can take an informed decision.
Maternal risk counseling
It is important for the couple to realize that long term survival of patients with significant
acquired cardiac lesion is never the same as that of general population. However, the long
term survival is unaffected by pregnancy. The pregnancy related risk depends upon factors
like nature of cardiac lesion, type of surgery done, type of valve used, cardiac functional
status of the woman, whether she's on anticoagulants or not.
Women with congenital cardiac lesions completely corrected by surgery early in life, usually
have no problems during pregnancy. Likewise women with acquired cardiac lesions such as
rheumatic heart disease in class I or II after successful correction are unlikely to deteriorate to
class III or IV unless some new cardiac insult like arrhythmia or failure of valve develops.
Women with pulmonary hypertension, Marfan's syndrome, pulmonary arteriovenous
fistulae or uncorrectable cardiac lesion in class III or IV inspite of medical treatment should be
advised against pregnancy due to increased maternal mortality associated with these.
Women in class III or IV should be advised to undergo corrective surgery prior to conception.
Women with prosthetic valves on anticoagulants are at increased risk of thromboembolism
due to suboptimal anticoagulation consequent to pregnancy associated hypercoaguability
and switch over from warfarin to heparin in first trimester of pregnancy. These women are
also at increased risk of side effects like osteoporosis, alopecia, painful nodules etc.
associated with long term use of heparin. There is an increased risk of bleeding
complications like PPH, episiotomy hematoma, abdominal wound hematoma etc. and
subacute bacterial endocarditis.
Fetal risk counseling
The increased fetal risk in pregnant women with surgically corrected cardiac lesions is due to
following factors:
a)
Genetic transmission of certain congenital cardiac defects.
b) Adverse effects of drugs like anticoagulants in women with valve replacement.
c)
Limited cardiac output due to mitral valvular disease
In women with congenital heart defects like pulmonary stenosis, patent ductus arteriosus,
coarctation of aorta and cyanotic heart disease, the risk of transmission to the foetus is 6-9%
whereas with defects like aortic stenosis, ventricular septal defect and atrial septal defect
1, 2, 3
the risk of transmission is 12-17%.
322009-10
Women with prosthetic valves are on life long anti coagulation and warfarin is the preferred
anticoagulant. Warfarin is contraindicated in pregnancy due to 5 - 10% risk of embryopathy
and congenital birth defects like nasal and limb hypoplasia associated with it. It also causes
early pregnancy loss and bleeding complications in fetus manifesting as microcephaly
mental retardation, optic atrophy, cerebellar atrophy etc. It can result in intracranial
hemorrhage and still birth during pregnancy.
These risks are minimized by replacing warfarin by heparin in the first trimester while
organogenesis is taking place. However it has been recently reported that the risk of
4
embryopathy with warfarin is very small if the dose is less than 5mg daily. Warfarin is
replaced by heparin near term close to delivery as heparin has a shorter half life and has an
antidote protamine sulphate available.
Women with mitral valvular disease have limited cardiac output with resultant decrease in
uterine blood flow. This results in low birth weight babies and increased incidence of
intrauterine growth retardation.
Management of a pregnant woman with surgically corrected cardiac lesion
As soon as the woman with surgically corrected cardiac lesion conceives she should get
booked and undergo cardiac evaluation in case she has not had it in the prepregnant state.
All those with features of valvular failure or cardiac decompensation or any other high risk
factors associated with increased maternal mortality should be offered medical termination
of pregnancy. It is best done in first trimester. Those who wish to continue pregnancy,
appropriate counseling regarding the maternal and foetal prognosis, need for frequent and
regular follow ups and need for hospitalization is done.
The basic principles of management of these women are the same as any other women with
cardiac disease. These include limitation of physical activity, dietary counseling and
restriction of sodium intake, avoidance of exposure to infections and prompt treatment of
the same and prevention of anemia by encouraging regular intake of iron and folic acid
supplements. However there are certain ante partum, intra partum and post partum
considerations specific to women with surgically corrected cardiac lesions.
Ante partum considerations:
Anticoagulation during pregnancy:
enlargement and history of prior embolisation need long term anticoagulation.
One of the following three regimens can be used for anticoagulation during pregnancy;
a)
Aggressively adjusted dose of low molecular weight heparin throughout pregnancy
with monitoring of Anti-Xa levels. It should be administered subcutaneously twice a
day. The dose should be adjusted to maintain the Anti Xa levels between 0.7 to 1.2 U/ml
4 hrs after administration of drug. If it is not possible to assess these levels then aPTT
should be maintained at or above 2.0.
b) Adjusted dose subcutaneous heparin throughout pregnancy with monitoring of aPTT.
Usually subcutaneous dose of 17,500 to 20,000 IU of UFH is required twice a day.
Although it is safer for the fetus but is associated with a higher risk of
thromboembolism, osteoporosis, alopecia, painful subcutaneous nodules and heparin
induced thrombocytopenia in the mother.
c)
Use of either subcutaneous LMWH or subcutaneous or continuous intravenous UFH
between 6 to 12 weeks and close to term i.e. at 36 weeks onwards and use of warfarin at,
all other times. Warfarin is monitored by INR and the lowest possible dose to maintain
the INR between 2.5 to 3.5 should be administered.
Warfarin should be avoided in first trimester due to the risk of spontaneous abortion,
embryopathy and prematurity associated with it. In Europe some physicians do continue
warfarin in the first trimester if the dose is less than 5 mg per day as they believe that warfarin
related embryopathy is dose dependent. However, there is still lack of sufficient ground for
recommendations about optimal antithrombotic therapy in pregnant women with
6
mechanical valves. Some physicians add low dose aspirin to the anti thrombotic regime.
Fetal monitoring:
In women on anticoagulants an early first trimester scan (9-13 weeks) for fetal viability and
another level 2 scan at 16-20 weeks to rule out any congenital anomaly is indicated. In
women with congenital cardiac defect a fetal echocardiography is done at 22 weeks to rule
out any inherited cardiac defect in the fetus. In late pregnancy close monitoring of the fetal
growth by clinical and ultrasonic evaluation is done for early detection of intrauterine
growth restriction.
Intra partum considerations
5, 6
This involves fine balancing between maternal and fetal risks. All women with mechanical
valves and some with biologic valves with coexistent atrial fibrillation, left atrial
33
2009-10
Antibiotic prophylaxis should be given as indicated and complete asepsis is maintained.
Spontaneous onset of labour is awaited. Vaginal route of delivery is preferred except if the
342009-10
patients who go into labour while still on warfarin. In these women warfarin should be
stopped immediately, Vitamin K is given intravenously, INR is corrected by administering
fresh frozen plasma in a dose of 1 unit per every 15 kg body weight and LSCS is done under
general anesthesia once INR is less than two. This is indicated to prevent intracranial
hemorrhage in the fetus. Regional block is contraindicated in these women. A liberal
uterine incision should be given to avoid difficult extraction of baby. Meticulous hemostasis
is achieved specially in the area under the bladder flap.
In women switched over to heparin, the drug is stopped at onset of true labour. The effect of
heparin wanes off in 6-8 hours. In case an emergency caesarean section is indicated the
effect of heparin can be neutralized by administering protamine suphate intravenously in
the dose of 1 mg for every 100 units of heparin. It is important to titrate the dose of protamine
sulphate according to the time elapsed since the last dose of heparin.It is better to
undercorrect as excess protamine sulphate has anticoagulant effect.During vaginal delivery
pudendal block is avoided for the risk of hematoma formation. Complete haemostasis
should be achieved while repairing episiotomy or any tear. Post delivery 20 units of oxytocin
in 1 litre of normal saline is infused over 24 hours.
2009-10
Bibliography
1.Mendelson M A. Congenital cardiac disease and pregnancy. Clin Perinatol. 1997;
24(2):467 - 82
2.Whittemore R, Hobbins J L ,Engle M A .Pregnancy and its outcome in women with and
without surgical treatment of congenital heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 1982; 50: 641-51.
3.Rose V, Gold R J M, Lindsay G, Allen M.A .Possible increase in incidence of congenital
heart disease among offspring of affected parents.J Am Coll Cardiol. 1985; 6:376- 82.
4.Vitale N , DeFeo M , de Santo L S, Pollice A , Tedesco N , Cotrufo M . Dose dependent fetal
complications of warfarin in pregnant women with mechanical valve. J Am Coll Cardiol.
1999; 33:1637-41.
5.Ginsberg Jeffrey S, Shian Chan Wee, Bates M, Kaatz Scott. Anticoagulation of pregnant
women with mechanical heart valves. Arch Intern Med 2003;163:697
6.Ginsberg J S, Greer I, Hirsh J. Use of antithrombotic agents during pregnancy. Chest.
2001; 119: 122s – 131s.
Postpartum considerations
Patient is carefully observed for any PPH or episiotomy hematoma following delivery. She
may be advised to rest for 24-48 hours for sealing of small bleeders. Heparin is restarted 4-6
hours after normal delivery and 24 hours after caesarean section. Oral anticoagulants can be
started concomitantly. Breast feeding is not contraindicated. Patient should be encouraged
to ambulate early and is discharged after a week if stable. Appropriate contraceptive advice
should be given before the woman is discharged. According to the WHO eligibility criteria for
contraceptive use (2004) in uncomplicated valvular heart disease in addition to barrier
contraception Cu IUCD, LNG IUCD, POP, DMPA /NET-EN and LNG implants all can be safely
prescribed (category 1). However combined oral contraceptives (COCs) are category 2 i.e
benefits outweigh risks. Antibiotic prophylaxis is advised for insertion of IUCD and female
sterilization. In case of complicated valvular disease i.e associated with pulmonary
hypertension, risk of atrial fibrillation, h/o SABE, COCs are contraindicated (category 4) and
IUCDs are category 2. Condoms, progestin only pill (POP), DMPA / NET-EN and LNG implants
are safe.
35
362009-10
ANAEMIA IN PREGNANCY
Dr. V. L. Deshmukh
Associate Professor & Unit Head Dept. of Obst. Gynaec
Govt. Medical College & Hospital Aurangabad 431 001 (M.S.)
Anaemia is the most common medical disorder of pregnancy. It is one of the important
causes of direct maternal death. In 47% of the maternal deaths in developing countries it is a
indirect cause of death (ICMR Report, 2000). It leads to serious morbidities in the mother
1
(CCF, haemorrhage, infection) and in fetus (Preterm delivery, IUGR, low iron stores. The best
part of anemia is that it is preventable.
Magnitude of Problem :
The overall prevalence of anemia is estimated to be 40% of the world's population.
Prevalence of anemia is 35% for non-pregnant women and 51% for pregnant women
globally.2 The prevalence of anemia in Indian pregnant population is about 88%.3 In India,
anemia antedates pregnancy, “Too early, Too frequently, Too many” is the rule. Therefore
anaemia is the most common medical disorder in pregnancy in the developing country.
Definition of Anaemia :
The WHO definition for diagnosis of anaemia in pregnancy is haemoglobin concentration of
less than 11 gm% and the haematocrit less than 33%. The Center for Disease Control (CDC)
4
USA, defines anemia as 10.5 gm% in second trimester of pregnancy.
Severity of Anemia :
According to ICMR anemia is catatorised into 4 groups depending upon the heamoglobin
5
level. This is the most exceptable categorization.
37
CategoryAnaemia severityHb level (gm%)
1
2
3
4Mild
Moderate
Severe10.0-10.9
07.0-10.0
Very severe (Decompensated)<4
<7
382009-10
2009-10
The Story of AnaemiaEffects of Anaemia on Pregnancy
The story of anemia starts in Indian women right from birth. The fetus born to an anemic
mother has no iron stores and hence it manifests with anemia in early infancy. During
adolescence the menstrual blood loss results in fall in the haemoglobin of the girl child.
Excessive menstrual loss, worm infestation (Hook worm and schistosomiasis), bleeding from
the GIT, haemorrhoids, diarrhoea all contribute to the pathological causes of iron loss.6 This
leads to iron depletion.Maternal-mild anaemia does not have any effect on pregnancy labour except that the iron
stores are low and mother becomes moderate to severely anaemic in subsequent pregnancies.
Moderate anaemia may cause increase weakness, lack of energy, fatigue and poor work
performance. Severe anaemia, is however associated with poor outcome. The women may
3,8,13,14
have palpitation, tachycardia, breathlessness leading to CCF which may be fatal.
There is
3,15,16
increase incidence of preterm labour (28.2%), PIH (31.2%) and sepsis.
Early age marriage and an early conception further compounds the problem of anemia. The
woman starts her pregnancy with depleted iron stores. During pregnancy her iron demands
increase i.e. 4 gm% in early pregnancy, 5.5 gm% from 20-32 wks and 6-8 gm% from 32 wks
onwards.7,8 An average Indian diet contains 19-20 mg of iron/day. As absorption rate is of iron is
around 10%, an average of 40-60 mg of iron should be available in the diet during pregnancy.
Diet alone cannot supply such high amounts of iron. Hence iron supplementation during
pregnancy is a must. Lack of ANC also adds to the problem as iron and FA supplements are not
taken by the patient. This leads to further lowering of the haemoglobin.Fetal-irrespective of the maternal iron status, the fetus derives iron from the mother. Hence the
fetus is not anaemic at birth. However no iron stores are present in this baby. Adverse perinatal
outcome in the form of preterm labour, IUGR and increase perinatal mortality rates are
15,17
observed in neonates of anemic mother.
Physiological hemodilution occurs during pregnancy where plasma volume increases by 40%
and RBC volume increased by 20%, this leads to a apparent fall in haemoglobin leading to
dilutional anemia of pregnancy.9
10
Faulty diet rich in phytates and phosphates make the iron salts insoluble. Defective
absorption due to presence of tea, coffee, milk, calcium make the iron unavailable to the
mother.
The bioavailability of haem iron is good accounting for a absorption rate of 15-30% in anemic
patient.11 The non-haem iron pool is made up of all other sources such as cereals, seeds,
vegetable, milk.11 Its absorption rate is only 5-10%.l The predominance of nonhaem iron in
12
Indian diet makes the iron bioavaibility less .
The pregnant women starts a pregnancy with depleted iron stores, compounded by
physiological haemodilution, inadequate and faulty diet, increase demands by fetus, low
bioavailable iron, diet low in ascorbic acid and high with phytates.
Most deliveries in rural and tribal areas are home confinements conducted by traditional birth
attendants who do not practice active management of third stage making them more prone to
postpartum haemorrhage.8 Repeated and closely spaced pregnancies with prolonged period
2,8
of lactation make most women enter pregnancy with little or no iron reserve.
The fetus born to this anemic mothers do not have any iron stores although they are not anemic
at birth.
39
Clinical Features
Symptoms : There are no symptoms in mild and moderate anemia. Patient may complain of
feeling of complaints, exhaustion, indigestion, loss of appetite and lassitude. Palpitation,
dyspnoea, edema, giddiness and rarely anasarca and even CCF can occur in severe cases. There
may be however symptoms of the original condition causing anemia e.g. bleeding piles.
Signs : There may be no signs in mild anemia. There may be pallor, glossitis and stomatitis.
Patient may have edema due to hypoproteinemia. Soft systolic murmur may be heard due to
hyperdynamic circulation. There could be fine crepitations at lung base in severe cases.
Diagnosis
Haemoglobin estimation is most practical, simple and easy method of diagnosis of anemia. It
can be done by Taliquist's scale, CuSo4 method, Sahli's method and cyanomethhaemoglobin
method. According to WHO haemoglobin less than 11 gm% is diagnostic of anemia.
Periperipheral smear is a bed side method. Presence of microcytic hypochromic RBCs is
diagnostic of iron deficiency of anemia. Anisocytosis, poikilocytosis and target cells are also
seen in iron deficiency anemia. Presence of malarial parasite in the peripheral smear can help to
find the cause.18
MCV (<80 fl), MCH (<27 pg) and MCHC are all low in iron deficiency anemia. There is evidence of
increase TIBC, and decrease serum iron levels in iron deficiency anemia. Serum ferritin gives a
good idea about the iron stores. If serum ferritin is less than 12 g/l then it is indicative of
depleted iron stores. Bone marrow biopsy is indicated only if there is no response to oral or
parenteral therapy after 4 weeks. Stool for ova cyst is done to diagnose worm infestation which
402009-102009-10
is very common cause of anemia. X - ray chest rules out tuberculosis. Significant bacteriuria
should also be ruled out as a cause of anemia. Serum proteins and KFTs can be done to find out
the cause of anemia.correct iron stores. It is indicated with patients intolerance to oral iron therapy, serious side
effects leading to noncompliance. Parenteral iron is available as iron dextran (imferon) which
can be given IM or IV and iron sorbital citrate (Jectofer) which can be given IM. Iron sucrose can
be given IV with no risk of anaphylactic reactions.
ManagementThe elemental iron needed to correct iron deficiency is calculated as (Normal haemoglobin -
Patients haemoglobin) x Weight (Kg) x 2.21 + 1000. Another simple method is to give 250 mg of
elemental iron for each gram of haemoglobin below normal.
It is very common experience for the obstetricians to see the patients of moderate to severe
anemia late in pregnancy. They have nil or inadequate ANC and have suboptimal or no iron
therapy during pregnancy. If the women present with mild to moderate anemia in second
trimester or early third trimester, oral iron therapy can be started. WHO recommends 30 - 60
mg of iron per day in women with iron stores (serum ferritin 80 pmol/L) and 120-180 mg/day of
iron in women without stores.19The IM route is most popular and is associated with less side effects. It is given by deep IM
injection with a thick needle on outer quadrant of buttock using a 'Z' technique to prevent dark
staining of the skin. The disadvantage of IM iron include pain, skin discoloration, abscess
formation, nausea, vomiting, headache, fever and lymphadenopathy.
The current situation demands that a cheap and easily available iron preparation (preferably
free of cost in Government Hospital) should be prescribed and the importance of taking iron
daily in pregnancy should be emphasized.Blood Transfusion : Blood transfusion is very rarely required. It is indicated in severe anemia after
36 weeks of gestation, APH cases where active blood loss is present, PPH and cases not
responding to oral or parenteral iron therapy. PCV is preferred for transfusion.8,23
Government of India, Ministry of Health recommends 100 mg elemental iron with 0.5 mg FA for
prophylaxis, for treatment 180 mg of elemental iron per day. This large dose of iron can lead to
serious side effects like nausea, vomiting, losse motions, abdominal cramping and
constipation. One needs to change the brand or iron salt if the patient cannot tolerate a
particular brand of iron. Unfortunately many patient do not take iron and compliance is hence
2,3,5
poor. Various methods have been used to increase compliance, giving drugs less frequently
initially, followed by daily later will increase the compliance.20Management of Labour : In first stage, patient should be in comfortable position. Oxygen
should be kept ready and should be given in dyspnoea. Digitalization may be required in CCF.
The aim is to delivery the patient vaginally. The second stage is curtailed by forceps delivery.
Third stage is managed with prostaglandins as ergometrin is contraindicated.
The patients response to therapeutic iron therapy is fast with rise in reticulocyte count at 5 - 10
days of start of therapy and increase haemoglobin by 0.7- 0.8 gm/week. Addition of FA helps in
21
improving results in supervised supplementation. Unsupervised supplementation however
22
did not give good results. Treatment with large doses is recommended till haemoglobin
becomes normal, then maintainance dose of 60 - 100 mg of iron per day is started till 3 months
post delivery.
The disadvantage of oral iron therapy is intolerance to medication, unpredictable absorption
and noncompliance. If there is no significant clinical or haematological improvement within 3
weeks, diagnostic re-evaluation is needed.8,23 Reasons of failure to oral therapy are inaccurate
diagnosis (non iron deficiency microcytic anaemia e.g. thalasemia, pyridoxine deficiency),
noncompliance, continuous blood loss through hook worm infestation or piles, faulty iron
absorption and concomitant folate deficiency.8,23,24
Parenteral iron therapy : The rise in haemoglobin after giving parenteral iron therapy is same as
oral iron therapy (0.7-1.0 gm/week). The main advantage is certainity of administration and to
41
Puerperium : The mother should have adequate rest, iron and FA therapy for 3 months. Any
infection is energetically treated. Puerperial sepsis, failing lactation, subinvolution of uterus
8,23
and thrombolism are common problem of the puerperium. The anemic patient should be
given contraceptive advice and asked not to conceive for atleast 2 years.
Antenatal Care in next pregnancy : The WHO recommends estimation of haemoglobin at first
visit, 16 weeks and 36 weeks of gestation in all patients. Prognosis is good if anemia is detected
and treated in time.
Prevention Strategies :
a)
19
Supplementation iron to nonpregnant women
b) Supplementation iron to pregnant women
c)
Diet advice
d) Food fortification
e)Treatment of hookworm / malaria
f)Improvement of sanitation, personal hygiene, better education and alleviation of poverty
422009-102009-10
1)World Health Organization. The prevalence of anemia in women. A tabulation of available
information. Geneva : WHO, 1992.18) Verhoeff FH, Brabin BJ, Chimsuki L, Kazembe P, Broadhead RL. An analysis of the
determinants of anaemia in pregnant women in rural Malawi-A basis for action. Ann Trop
Med Parasitol 1999;93:11933.
2)Abel R, Rajaratnam J, Sampathkumar V. Anaemia in pregnancy. Impact of iron, Deworming
and IEC, RUSHA Dept. Tamil Nadu : CMC Vellore, 1999.19) MNHajra Nandita Mitra Anemia in pregnancy; Pregnancy at risk current concepts 2001-4th
edition,ch40; pg231,
3)Indian Council of Medical Research. Evaluation of the National Nutritional anemia
prophylasix programme. Task Force Study. New Delhi : ICMR, 1989.20) Bhatt RV. Anemias in pregnancy; early diagnosis and treatment. J Ind Med Assoc
1995;93:80-82.
4)Sarin AR. Severe anemia of pregnancy, recent experience. Int J Gynecol Obstet 1995;50
(Suppl.2):S45-S49.5)World Health Organization. Report of A who Group of Experts on Nutritional Anaemias.
Technical report series No. 503. Geneva: WHO, 1972.21) Sood SK, Ramachandran, K, Mathur M et al. WHO sponsored collatorative studies on
nutritional anemias in India. The effects of supplemental oral iron administration to
pregnant women. OJ Med 1975;44:241-58.
References
6)
8)
9)
Bothwell TH, Charlton RW, Cook JD, Finch DA. Iron metabolism in man. Oxford : Blackwell,
1979.
Sharma JB. Medical complications in pregnancy. In : Sharma JB (ed). The Obsetetric
Protocol, 1st edn. Delhi: Jaypee Brothers, 1998;78-98
DC DUTTA Textbook of Obs:Anaemia in pregnancy
22) Sood SK, Madan N, Rusai U, Sharma S. Nutritional anemia in pregnancy and its health
implications with special reference to India. Ann Natl Acad Med Sci 1989;25:41-50.
23) Sharma JB. Iron deficiency anemia in pregnancy – still a major cause of maternal mortality
and morbidity in India. Obs Gynae Today 1999;IV:693-701.
24) Prema K. Anaemia in pregnancy. In : Ratnam SS, Rao KB, Arulkumaran S. (eds) Obstetrics
and Gynaecology. Vol I Madras : Orient Longman 1992, 42-53.
10) Hallberg et al.Determination of iron absorption from whole diet.A new tool model
usingradiation isotopes given as haem nonhaem iron.Scand J Haematol 1972:9:193-197
11) Hulten LE, Gramatkovski A, Gleerup A, Hallberg L. Iron absorption from the whole diet.
Relation to meal composition, iron requirements and iron stores. Eur J Clin Nutr
1995;49:794-808.
12) Stolzfusr et al;guidelines to use iron supplements to prevent and treat anaemia. Geneva;
INACG, WHO, UNICEF, 1998
13) Bhatt R.Maternal mortality in India-FOGSI-WHO Study.JObstet Gynecol Ind 1997:47;207
214
14) Sharma JB, Arora BS, Kumar S, Goel S, Dhamija A. Helminth and protozoan intestinal
infections: An important cause for anemia in pregnant women in Delhi, India. J Obstet
Gynecol Ind 2001;51(6):58-61.
15) Prema K, Neela KS, Ramalakshmi BA. Anemia and adverse obstetric outcome. Nutri Rep Int
1981;23:637-43.
16) Rusia UN, Madan N, Agarwal N, Sikka M, Sood SK. Effect of maternal iron deficiency anemia
on fetal outcome. Ind J Pathol Microbil 1995;38:273-79.
17) Lops VR, Huntr LP, Dixon LR. Anemia in pregnancy. Am Fam Physician 1995;51:1189-97.
43
442009-10
THROMBOEMBOLIC DISEASE
DURING PREGNANCY
Dr. Kanan Yelikar, Head of the department govt. medical
2009-10
Risk Factors Identified from Individual Case Analysis of 31 Maternal Deaths
as A Result of Venous Thromboembolism (1997-19990)
Risk Factor
Number of Cases
Comment
Age31The rate of death is double in women older than 30 years.
Obesity13Body mass index > 30. All patients diagnosed in the third
trimester were overweight. Increased dosage of low molecular
-weight heparin is recommended for the treatment of venous
thromboemblism (VTE)
Immobility5All patients had prolonged bed rest.
Family History
of VTE4Strong history of VTE.
All deaths occurred in the antenatal period
Cesarean
delivery4The number of events decreased dramatically from the previous
report after the 1995 Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists guideline.
History of VTE3Two patients were obese.
Maternal RisksAir Travel2Both cases occurred anternatally.
Pregnancy introduces a significant risk of VTE events. Many important changes in the
coagulation and vascular systems occur during pregnancy and these changes support the
accepted orthodoxy that pregnancy is a state of hypercoagulation, due to presence of
venous stasis, hypercoagulability and vascular damage (Vi rchow's triad)Other Risk Factors :
collage aurangabad
Dr. Ashwini Kale
VTE venous thromboembolism is the most common cause of Maternal death in the U.K. The
maternal mortality is 1.45 deaths per 1 lac pregnancies. Pulmonary embolism remains the
leading direct cause of maternal mortality. VTE is a major cause of concern particularly
during pregnancy, patients on O. C. Pills or HRT (Hormonal Replacement Therapy) It is also
important to remember the considerable morbidity from the miserable and disabling
postphlebitic syndrome, which develops in > 20% of survivors.
Pregnancy introduces a significant risk of VTE events. Many important changes in the
coagulation and vascular systems occur during pregnancy, and these changes support the
accepted paradox that pregnancy is a state of hypercoagulation. Each element of Virchows
triad n present: venous stasis, hypercoagulability, and vascular damage. Table 43-1
summarizes additional feature in pregnancy that add to the risk of VTE, based on individual
case analysis reporting.
1.Age > 30 yrs risk is doubled.
2.Obesity BMI > 30
3.Immobility.
4.Family history of VTE
5.Cesarean Delivery.
6.History of VTE
7.AIR travel during pregnancy
Thombophilias
This term has been coined to describe, the tendency of some individuals to develop thrombosis
more easily than others is often inherited thrombophilia.
“Thrombophilia” (Thrombos = coagulation; philia = love) refers to cluster of disorders that are
associated with a tendency towards thrombosis and a persistent hypercoagulable state. This
phenomenon may be due to factors that are inherited (genetic), acquired or complex, wherein
genetic factors interact with environmental influences
45
462009-10
Normal changes in coagulation during pregnancy
Normal pregnancy is associated with major changes in all aspects of haemostasis-increasing
concentrations of most clotting factors, decreasing concentrations' of some of the natural
anticoagulants, and reducing fibrinolytic activity-so that as pregnancy progresses and during
the puerperium the overall balance is shifted towards apparent
Hypercoagulability:
We know that the plasma fibrinogen level increases during pregnancy by 50% from 200 - 300
mg% to 400 - 600 mg% as compared to the non-pregnant females.
Other clotting factor activities that are increased appreciably during pregnancy are factors VII,
VIII, IX & X. Factor II is increased only slightly, whereas activities of factors XI & XIII are decreased
somewhat.
There is a modest decrease in platelet concentration as pregnancy advances.
2009-10
and / or the intervillous space. Clinically, placental vasculopathy is associated with pre-
eclampsiaa, IUGR, placental abruption and some cases of fetal loss and preterm labour.
Not all women with thrombophilia will develop VTE during pregnancy, suggesting the
existence of additional, yet unidentified, environmental factors. The risk of VTE depends on the
type of thrombophilia and the existence of additional risk factors. As previously described, Anti-
Thrombin III deficiency is the most thrombogenic of the hereditary thrombophilias, with a 50
percent lifetime risk of thrombosis.
Risk assessment and scoring : who should be offered thrombophilia screening ?
It is now obvious that heritable thrombophilic defects are much more prevalent than what we
used to think and most carriers remain asymptomatic. Routine screening of all women for
thrombophilic defects, however, is not justifiable and may cause more harm than good
because finding a defect might lead to unnecessary intervention with antithrombotics.
In Eurpoe, most clinicians recommend screening of women who have : A past history of VTE and
Antiphospholipids
The most common and important acquired thrombophilic defects are those broadly grouped
together as "antiphospholipids", which comprise Lupus Anticoagulants and raised
anticardiolipin antibody concentrations. Antiphospholipids occur in a variety of conditions,
including connective tissue disorders (such as systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic
sclerosis, and Bechet's syndrome), some infections, exposure to certain drugs (such as
phenothiazines, hydralazine, and procainamide), and sometimes with no evident undertlying
pathology or drug exposure. The persistent presence of antiphospholipids ( persisting in at
least two samples collected at least six weeks apart) is associated with an increased risk of both
venous and arterial thrombosis, and has for many years been know to increase the risk of
recurrent fetal loss.
•
Asymptomatic women who have a family history of confirmed VTE.
Thrombophilia screening
The workup on thrombophilia screen runs as follows :
•Antithrombin III
•Protein C & S
•APTT
•ACA & LA
•Fibrinogen level
•Homocysteine
•CBC
Thrombophilia and adverse pregnancy outcome
Recent data suggest that endothelial dysfunction, vasoconstriction, placental ischemia and
enhanced coagulation are associated with abnormal placental development, which may lead
to inadequate fetomaternal circulation and decreased placental perfuson.
The subsequent vasculopathy and secondary thrombosis from hyper coagulability may result
in inadequate perfusion of the intervillous space, preeclampsia, placental infarcts, IUGR,
placental abruption and IUFD. The term placental vasculopathy has been coined to describe
pathological placental changes characterized by superficial endovascular cytotrophoblast
invasion in the spiral arteries, acute atherosis and thromobitc processes in the spiral arteries
47
Diagnosis
The typical clinical features of deep vein thrombosis in pregnancy differ somewhat from those
in the nonpregnant patient in relation to lateralization and extent. In up to 90% of cases,
thrombosis affects the left leg, and in most patients, the proximal veins affected. Deep venous
thrombosis restricted to the calf veins is uncommon during pregnancy, although it may
complicate the postpartum period.
482009-102009-10
The differential diagnosis of a painful, swollen leg in this situation is narrow. Alternative causes,
such as ruptured Baker's cyst and hematoma, are rare in this age group, and cellulitis is
uncommon. Symptoms may be subtle and may be confused with common benign changes in
pregnancy, such as lower extremity edema or muscle cramping. The unilateral nature of VTE is a
useful distinguishing characteristic. Generalized and point tenderness are common features.
Dorsiflexion of the calf causes pain (Homan's sign) if the clot is: in that region,Although heparin does not cross the placenta, its use to teat VTE can precipitate adverse
pregnancy out comes by causing maternal hemorrhage. Warfarin crosses the placenta and is
associated with specific teratogenic effects.
Tender, indurated veins may be palpable on-careful inspection of the popliteal fossa.
Asymmetry of the legs is usually seen below the level of the venous obstruction. Localized
erythema suggests concomitant superficial thrombosis.
The clinical features of pulmonary embolism axe no different from those in the nonpregnant
patient, bat may be masked by the physiologic dyspnea seen in pregnancy. In most cases, the
features are those of pulmonary infarction, with pleuritic chest pain of acute or subacute onset
with or without dyspnea.
Diagnosis of dvt during pregnancy (TABLE 1)
Clinical diagnosis is notoriously inaccurate for diagnosing DVT. Doppler ultrasonography has a
sensitivity and specificity of 95% for proximal DVTs (table 1) Doppler ultrasonography is more
accurate for detecting symptomatic, proximal, and first-time DVTs than for detecting those that
are asymptomatic, distal, or recurrent. Radiological studies are contraindicated in pregnancy.
Table 1
Operating Characteristics of diagnostic tests for proximal DVT
Diagnostic test
Sensitivity% Specificity%
Positive LRNegative LR
Venography100100infinity0
Doppler ultrasonography9595190.05
Duplex ultrasonography9595190.05
Impedence
plethysmography8095160.21
Loadine 125 fibrinogen
scan79622.10.34
88-10050-801.9-5.00-0.02
D-Dimer level
49
Thromboembolism in pregnancy
General
The key elements of the management of VTE in pregnancy are a high index of clinical suspicion,
objective confirmation by imaging, and administration of heparin for the rest of the pregnancy
followed by heparin or warfarin for at least 6 weeks postpartum and 6 months in total
Interventions to prevent and treat VTE are pharmacologic antithrombotics, thrombolytic
and mechanical measures (Table 2). Amongst the pharmacologic agents, heparins and
warfarin are the principal drugs. The efficacy of aspirin in preventing VTE. is debated. A meta-
analysis and a randomized study of thrombo - prophylaxis in lower limb orthopedic surgery
showed evidence of an antithrombotic effect, but the use of aspirin for this purpose in
pregnancy cannot be supported. Novel oral anticoagulants are under investigation,
including an oral direct thrombin inhibitor, ximelagatran.The role of these agents has not
been established, and there are no data on their use in pregnancy. In VTE thrombolytic
therapy is restricted to emergency management of massive pulmonary embolism and limb
salvage in rare cases of massive lower limb deep venous thrombosis with venous gangrene.
Thrombolytic agents are associated with miscarriage or fetal death and maternal bleeding.
Their use is relatively contraindicated in pregnancy. Similarly, these agents would likely
induce hemorrhage soon after delivery and therefore empirically should not he used. Under
these circumstances, massive pulmonary embolism has been treated with heparin
anticoagulation and emergency pulmonary embolectomy. A recent review of anecdotal
report of thrombolytic therapy in pregnancy implied that the risk to the mother and fetus
may be lower than previously suggested.
502009-10
2009-10
Pharmacologic and Non pharmacologic Intervention
Antithrombotic and thrombolytic agentsMechanical measures
HeparinsGraduated compression
Unfractionated haparinStokings
Low-molecular-weight heparinMechanical calf compression
Recommendations for Thromboprophylaxis in Pregnancy
Risk Category
Slight
Women who have no personal history of venous
thrombosis, but a positive family history and who are
heterozygous for protein S deficiency, heterozygous







Your antenatal appointments

You'll have a number of antenatal appointments during your pregnancy, and you'll see a midwife or sometimes an obstetrician (doctor specialising in pregnancy).

They'll check the health of you and your baby, give you useful information and answer any questions.

Pregnant employees have the right to paid time off for antenatal care.

This page lists the appointments you'll be offered and when you should have them.

If you're pregnant with your first baby, you'll have more appointments than those already with children.

Starting your antenatal (pregnancy) care

As soon as possible after you find out you're pregnant, you can refer yourself for NHS pregnancy care so you can start your antenatal care with a midwife. This is usually done with an online form. If you cannot refer yourself online, the websites of local NHS trusts can tell you how to contact maternity services near you.

You should have your first midwife appointment before you're 10 weeks pregnant where possible. If you're more than 10 weeks pregnant, you should still refer yourself to start your pregnancy care as soon as possible.

You do not need to tell a GP you're pregnant unless you're taking medicine or have a long-term health condition. If you're registered with a GP, they'll be told about your pregnancy after your first midwife appointment.

Find out about health things you should know in pregnancy, including taking folic acid.

Screening for sickle cell disease and thalassaemia should be offered before 10 weeks.

This is so you can find out about all your options and make an informed decision if your baby has a chance of inheriting these conditions.

It's important to tell your midwife or doctor if: 

    there were any complications or infections in a previous pregnancy or delivery, such as pre-eclampsia or premature birth
    you're being treated for a long-term condition, such as diabetes or high blood pressure
    you or anyone in your family has previously had a baby with a health condition (for example, spina bifida)
    there's a family history of an inherited condition (for example, sickle cell or cystic fibrosis)
    you know that you're a genetic carrier of an inherited condition such as sickle cell or thalassaemia – you should also tell the midwife if you know the baby's biological father is a genetic carrier of these conditions
    you have had fertility treatment and either a donor egg or donor sperm

8 to 12 weeks: booking appointment

It's best to see your midwife or doctor as early as possible to get the information you need to have a healthy pregnancy.

Some tests, such as screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia, should be done before you're 10 weeks pregnant.

Your midwife or doctor should give you information about: 

    how the baby develops during pregnancy
    nutrition and diet
    exercise and pelvic floor exercises
    antenatal screening tests
    your antenatal care
    breastfeeding, including workshops
    antenatal education
    maternity benefits
    your options for where to have your baby

Your midwife or doctor should:

    give you your handheld notes and plan of care
    see if you may need additional care or support
    plan the care you'll get throughout your pregnancy
    identify any potential risks associated with any work you may do
    measure your height and weight, and calculate your body mass index (BMI)
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    find out whether you're at increased risk of gestational diabetes or pre-eclampsia
    offer you screening tests and make sure you understand what's involved before you decide to have any of them
    offer you an ultrasound scan at 11 to 14 weeks to estimate when your baby is due
    offer you an ultrasound scan at 18 to 21 weeks to check the physical development of your baby and look for 11 rare conditions
    ask about your mood to assess your mental health
    ask about any past or present severe mental illness or psychiatric treatment

This appointment is an opportunity to tell your midwife or doctor if you're in a vulnerable situation or if you need extra support.

This could be because of domestic abuse or violence, sexual abuse or female genital mutilation (FGM).

FGM can cause problems during labour and childbirth, which can be life threatening for you and your baby.

It's important you tell your midwife or doctor if this has happened to you.
11 to 14 weeks: dating scan

This is the ultrasound scan to estimate when your baby is due, check the physical development of your baby, and screen for possible conditions, including Down's syndrome.
16 weeks pregnant

Your midwife or doctor will give you information about the ultrasound scan you'll be offered at 18 to 21 weeks.

They'll also help with any concerns or questions you have.

Your midwife or doctor should: 

    review, discuss and record the results of any screening tests
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    consider an iron supplement if you're anaemic

18 to 21 weeks

You'll be offered an ultrasound scan to check the physical development of your baby. This is also known as the 20-week scan.

Screening for HIV, syphilis and hepatitis B will be offered again by a specialist midwife if you opted not to have it earlier in pregnancy.

These tests are recommended as they greatly reduce the risk of passing infection from you to your baby.

At around 20 weeks, you'll be offered the whooping cough vaccine.
25 weeks pregnant

You'll have an appointment at 25 weeks if this is your first baby.

Your midwife or doctor should:

    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    talk about your baby’s movements. If you have any concerns or your baby is moving less than usual, you’ll be advised to contact maternity services straight away.

28 weeks

Your midwife or doctor should: 

    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    offer more screening tests
    offer your first anti-D treatment if you're rhesus negative
    discuss how to prepare for your labour and birth
    talk to you about active labour
    discuss what happens after the birth, including how to care for your new baby and feed them
    tell you about about the vitamin K injection your baby is recommended to have
    ask about your baby's movements

From 28 weeks, you'll be offered the RSV vaccine. This will help protect your baby from respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) for the first few months after they're born.

It's best to have this as soon as possible from 28 weeks, but it can be given later if needed, including up until you go into labour.
31 weeks

You'll have an appointment at 31 weeks if this is your first baby.

Your midwife or doctor should:

    review, discuss and record the results of any screening tests from the last appointment
    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    ask about your baby's movements

34 weeks

Your midwife or doctor should give you information about preparing for labour and birth, including how to recognise active labour, ways of coping with pain in labour, and your birth plan.

Your midwife or doctor should: 

    review, discuss and record the results of any screening tests from the last appointment
    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    offer your second anti-D treatment if you're rhesus negative
    ask about your baby's movements

Your midwife or doctor should give you information about caesarean section. This discussion may take place at the 34-week appointment, or at another time during your pregnancy.

They'll discuss with you the reasons why a caesarean might be offered, what the procedure involves, the risks and benefits, and the implications for future pregnancies and births.
36 weeks

Your midwife or doctor should give you information about:

    breastfeeding
    caring for your newborn baby
    vitamin K and screening tests for your newborn baby
    your own health after your baby is born
    the "baby blues" and postnatal depression

Your midwife or doctor will also:

    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    check the position of your baby
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    offer external cephalic version (ECV) if your baby is in the breech position
    ask about your baby's movements

38 weeks

Your midwife or doctor will discuss the options and choices about what happens if your pregnancy lasts longer than 41 weeks.

Your midwife or doctor should: 

    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    continue to discuss your labour and birth options with you
    ask about your baby’s movements

40 weeks

You'll have an appointment at 40 weeks if this is your first baby.

Your midwife or doctor should give you more information about what happens if your pregnancy lasts longer than 41 weeks.

Your midwife or doctor should:

    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    ask about your baby's movements

41 weeks

Your midwife or doctor should:

    use a tape measure to measure the size of your uterus
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for protein
    offer a membrane sweep
    discuss the options and choices for induction of labour
    ask about your baby's movements

42 weeks

If you have not had your baby by 42 weeks and have chosen not to have an induction, you should be offered increased monitoring of the baby.







You can start your pregnancy care as soon as you find out you're pregnant.

To do this is you can refer yourself for NHS pregnancy care so you can start your pregnancy (antenatal) care with a midwife. This is usually done with an online form. If you cannot refer yourself online, the websites of local NHS trusts can tell you how to contact maternity services.

Your first appointment with a midwife should happen before you're 10 weeks pregnant.

If you're more than 10 weeks pregnant you should still refer yourself to start your pregnancy care as soon as possible.

Find out about health things you should know in pregnancy, such as taking folic acid.
What is pregnancy (antenatal) care?

This is the care you have while you're pregnant to make sure you and your baby are as well as possible.

The NHS in England will offer you:

    10 pregnancy appointments (7 if you've had a child before) to check the health and development of you and your baby
    screening tests to find out the chance of your baby having certain conditions, such as Down's syndrome
    blood tests to check for syphilis, HIV and hepatitis B
    screening for inherited blood disorders (sickle cell and thalassaemia)

You'll be offered more appointments if you or your baby need them.

Depending on your health and where you live, you may see:

    a midwife for all your appointments
    a midwife for some appointments and a GP for others

How do I start my pregnancy care?

As soon as you find out you're pregnant you can refer yourself for NHS pregnancy care so you can start your antenatal care with a midwife.

You do not need to tell a GP you're pregnant unless you're taking medicine or you have a long-term health condition. If you're registered with a GP, they'll be told about your pregnancy after your first midwife appointment.
Your first midwife appointment

This appointment lasts around an hour.

Your midwife will ask questions to make sure you get the care that's right for you.

They will ask about:

    where you live and who you live with
    your partner, if you have one
    the baby's biological father's medical history
    any other pregnancies or children
    smoking, alcohol and drug use
    whether you've had fertility treatment
    your physical and mental health, and any issues or treatment you've had in the past
    any health issues in your family
    your job, if you have one

Find out more about what happens at your first midwife appointment.
When and where will my appointments be?

Find out more about when you'll have your antenatal appointments.

Your appointments can take place at:

    your home
    a Children's Centre
    a GP surgery
    a hospital

You'll usually go to the hospital for your pregnancy scans.
What can I do now for me and my baby?

It's important not to miss any of your antenatal appointments. Some of the tests and measurements that can find possible problems have to be done at specific times.

There are also things you can do to keep you and your baby as healthy as possible in pregnancy, including:

    not smoking
    not drinking alcohol
    getting some exercise that's safe in pregnancy
    having a healthy pregnancy diet
    knowing which foods to avoid in pregnancy
    taking a folic acid supplement and thinking about taking a vitamin D supplement
    knowing how to avoid infections that may harm your unborn baby, and symptoms to look out for
    knowing which vaccinations you should get
    knowing about baby movements in pregnancy
    knowing how to cope with feelings, worries and relationships in pregnancy



Your antenatal care

Antenatal care is the care you get from health professionals during your pregnancy. This includes a midwife, or sometimes a doctor who specialises in pregnancy and birth (obstetrician).

It's sometimes called pregnancy care or maternity care.

You should start your antenatal care as soon as possible once you know you're pregnant.

You can refer yourself for NHS pregnancy care so you can start your care with a midwife. This is usually done with an online form.

If you cannot refer yourself online, the websites of local NHS trusts can tell you how to contact maternity services near you.

Find out about health things you should know in pregnancy, including taking folic acid.
What is antenatal care?

This is the care you receive while you're pregnant to make sure you and your baby are as well as possible.

The midwife or doctor providing your antenatal care will:

    check the health of you and your baby
    give you useful information to help you have a healthy pregnancy, including advice about healthy eating and exercise
    discuss your options and choices for your care during pregnancy, labour and birth
    answer any questions you may have

If you’re pregnant in England you will be offered:

    2 pregnancy ultrasound scans at 11 to 14 weeks and 18 to 21 weeks
    antenatal screening tests to find out the chance of your baby having certain conditions, such as Down's syndrome
    blood tests to check for syphilis, HIV and hepatitis B
    screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia

You may also be offered antenatal classes, including breastfeeding workshops.

Ask your midwife about classes in your area.
Starting antenatal care

You can refer yourself for NHS pregnancy care as soon as you know you're pregnant so you can start your care with a midwife.

Your first midwife appointment should happen before you're 10 weeks pregnant where possible.

You do not need to tell a GP you're pregnant unless you're taking medicine or have a long-term health condition. If you're registered with a GP, they'll be told about your pregnancy after your first midwife appointment.

It's best to see a midwife or GP as early as possible to get the information you need about having a healthy pregnancy.

Some tests, such as screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia, should be done before you're 10 weeks pregnant. If you're more than 10 weeks pregnant, you should still refer yourself for NHS pregnancy care as soon as possible.

If you have special health needs, your midwife, GP or obstetrician may take shared responsibility for your maternity care.

This means they'll all be involved in your care during pregnancy.

Let your midwife know if you have a disability that means you have special requirements for your antenatal appointments or for labour.

If you do not speak English, tell your midwife.
How many antenatal appointments will I have?

If you're expecting your first child, you'll have up to 10 antenatal appointments.

If you have had a baby before, you'll have around 7 appointments, but sometimes you may have more – for example, if you develop a medical condition.

Early in your pregnancy, your midwife or doctor will give you written information about how many appointments you're likely to have and when they'll happen.

You should have a chance to discuss the schedule of antenatal appointments with them.

If you cannot keep an appointment, let the clinic or midwife know and rearrange it.
Where will I have my antenatal appointments?

Your appointments can take place at:

    your home
    a Children's Centre
    a GP surgery
    a hospital

You'll usually go to the hospital for your pregnancy scans.

Antenatal appointments should take place in a setting where you feel able to discuss sensitive issues, such as domestic abuse, sexual abuse, mental health problems or drugs.

To make sure you get the best pregnancy care, your midwife will ask you many questions about your and your family's health, and your preferences.

Your midwife will carry out some antenatal checks and tests, some of which will be done throughout your pregnancy, such as urine tests and blood pressure checks.

The results may affect your choices later in pregnancy, so it's important not to miss them.

Your midwife will also ask about any other social care support you may have or need, such as support from social workers or family liaison officers.
Questions you might be asked

The midwife or doctor might ask about:

    the date of the first day of your last period
    your health
    any previous illnesses and operations you have had
    any previous pregnancies and miscarriages
    the ethnic origins of you and your partner to find out whether your baby may be at risk of certain inherited conditions
    whether your family has a history of twins
    your job, your partner's job and what kind of accommodation you live in to see whether your circumstances might affect your pregnancy
    how you're feeling and whether you have been depressed

Your antenatal appointments are an opportunity to tell your midwife or doctor if you're in a vulnerable situation or if you need extra support.

This could be because of domestic abuse or violence, sexual abuse or female genital mutilation.
Antenatal appointments after 24 weeks

From around 24 weeks of your pregnancy, your antenatal appointments will usually become more frequent.

But if your pregnancy is uncomplicated and you're in good health, you may not be seen as often as someone who needs to be more closely monitored.

Later visits are usually quite short and may last 20 to 30 minutes.

Your midwife or doctor will: 

    check your urine and blood pressure
    feel your tummy (abdomen) to check the baby's position
    measure your womb (uterus) to check your baby's growth
    listen to your baby's heartbeat, if you want them to

You can also ask questions or talk about anything that's worrying you.

Talking about your feelings is as important as all the antenatal tests and examinations.

You should be given information about:

    making your birth plan
    preparing for labour and birth
    how to tell if you're in active labour
    induction of labour if your baby is overdue (after your expected date of delivery)
    feeling depressed after childbirth – such as the "baby blues" and postnatal depression
    feeding your baby
    vitamin K (given to prevent vitamin K deficiency bleeding in your baby)
    screening tests for newborn babies
    looking after yourself and your new baby

Find out about your schedule of antenatal appointments and what to expect at each one

At each antenatal appointment from 24 weeks of pregnancy, your midwife or doctor will check your baby's growth.

To do this, they'll measure the distance from the top of your womb to your pubic bone.

The measurement will be recorded in your notes.
Your baby's movements

Keep track of your baby's movements.

If you have not felt any movement by the time you are 24 weeks pregnant, contact your midwife who will check your baby’s heartbeat.

After 24 weeks, if your baby’s movements become less frequent, slow down or stop (called reduced foetal movement), contact your midwife or doctor immediately – do not wait until the next day. Your midwife or doctor will check you and your baby and measure your bump.

You'll be offered an ultrasound scan if they have any concerns about how your baby is growing and developing.

Find out more about your baby's movements in pregnancy.
Your maternity notes

At your booking appointment, your midwife will record your details and add to them at each appointment. These are your maternity notes.

Your maternity notes may be in a record book, sometimes called handheld notes. You’ll take your maternity notes home and be asked to bring them to all your antenatal appointments. Take your notes with you wherever you go in case you need medical attention while you’re away from home.

Your maternity notes may be electronic, which you will be able to access digitally.

You can ask your maternity team to explain anything in your notes that you do not understand.
Planning ahead for your appointments

Waiting times in clinics can vary and having to wait a long time for an appointment can be particularly difficult if you have young children with you.

Planning ahead can make your visits easier.

Here are some suggestions: 

    write a list of any questions you want to ask and take it with you
    make sure you get answers to your questions or the chance to discuss any worries
    if your partner is free, they may be able to go with you – this can help them feel more involved in the pregnancy
    you can buy refreshments in some clinics – take a snack with you if you cannot buy one at the clinic

The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) antenatal care guidelines give useful information on the timing of visits during pregnancy and a description of what will happen each time.
Get Best Start in Life pregnancy and baby emails




Your first midwife appointment

As soon as you find out you are pregnant, contact a GP or midwife and they will help you book your first appointment.

Your first midwife appointment (also called the booking appointment) should happen before you're 10 weeks pregnant. This is because you'll be offered some tests that should be done before 10 weeks.

If you're more than 10 weeks pregnant and have not seen a GP or midwife, contact a GP or midwife as soon as possible.

You'll still have your first midwife appointment and start your NHS pregnancy journey.
Where the first appointment happens

Your first appointment may take place in:

    your home
    a hospital
    a GP surgery
    a Children's Centre

Where the appointment happens depends on the pregnancy services in your area.
How long the appointment lasts

The appointment usually takes around an hour.
What your midwife may ask

Your midwife will ask some questions to help find out what care you need.

They may ask about:

    where you live and who you live with
    the baby's father
    any other pregnancies or children
    smoking, alcohol and drug use
    your physical and mental health, and any issues or treatment you've had
    any health issues in your family
    domestic abuse
    female genital mutilation (FGM)
    your job, if you have one
    whether you have people around to help and support you, for example a partner or family members

The first appointment is a chance to tell your midwife if you need help or are worried about anything that might affect your pregnancy. This could include domestic abuse or violence, sexual abuse, or female genital mutilation (FGM).

FGM can cause problems during labour and birth. It's important you tell your midwife or doctor if this has happened to you.
Tests at your first appointment

Your midwife will ask if they can:

    measure your height and weight, and work out your body mass index (BMI)
    measure your blood pressure and test your urine for signs of pre-eclampsia
    take blood tests to check your general health and blood group, and to see if you have HIV, syphilis or hepatitis B

They'll also offer you a blood test for sickle cell and thalassaemia (blood disorders that can be passed on to the baby) if they think there's a high chance you might have them. They'll work out your chance by asking some questions.
Things your midwife may discuss with you

Your midwife may give you information about:

    how the baby develops during pregnancy
    a healthy pregnancy diet and foods to avoid in pregnancy
    pregnancy exercise and pelvic floor exercises
    your NHS pregnancy (antenatal) care
    breastfeeding
    antenatal classes
    benefits you can get when you're pregnant, such as free prescriptions and free dental care
    your options for where to have your baby
    the tests and scans you'll be offered in pregnancy

Ask questions if you want to know more or do not understand something.
Your maternity notes

At the end of the first appointment, your midwife will give you your maternity notes. The notes may be digital in an app or website or written down in a book or folder.

These notes are a record of your health, appointments and test results in pregnancy. They also have useful phone numbers, for example your maternity unit or midwife team.




Antenatal checks and tests

During your pregnancy, you'll be offered a range of tests, including blood tests and ultrasound baby scans.

These are designed to:

    help make your pregnancy safer
    check and assess the development and wellbeing of you and your baby
    screen for particular conditions

You do not have to have any of the tests – it's your choice. However, it's important to understand the purpose of all tests so you can make an informed decision about whether to have them. You can discuss this with your maternity team.
Weight and height checks in pregnancy

You'll be weighed at your booking appointment, but you will not be weighed regularly during your pregnancy. Your height and weight are used to calculate your body mass index (BMI).

If you are overweight you have an increased risk of problems during pregnancy.

Find out more about being overweight when you get pregnant

You're likely to put on 10 to 12.5kg (22 to 28lb) in pregnancy after being 20 weeks pregnant. Much of the extra weight is because the baby is growing, but your body also stores fat for making breast milk after birth.

Talk to a GP or midwife if you are concerned about your weight.

It's important to have a healthy diet in pregnancy and do regular exercise during your pregnancy.

Antenatal urine tests

You'll be asked to give a urine sample at your antenatal appointments. Your urine is checked for several things, including protein.

If this is found in your urine, it may mean you have a urine infection. It may also be a sign of pre-eclampsia.

Blood pressure tests in pregnancy

Your blood pressure will be checked at every antenatal visit. A rise in blood pressure later in pregnancy could be a sign of pre-eclampsia.

It's very common for your blood pressure to be lower in the middle of your pregnancy than at other times. This is not a problem, but it may make you feel lightheaded if you get up quickly. Talk to your midwife if you're concerned about it.

Find out more about high blood pressure and pregnancy
Blood tests and scans in pregnancy

As part of your antenatal care, you'll be offered several blood tests and scans. Some are offered to everyone, while others are only offered if you might be at risk of a particular infection or condition.

All the tests are done to make your pregnancy safer or check that the baby is healthy, but you do not have to have them if you do not want to.

For more information visit our page about screening tests in pregnancy

Blood group and rhesus status

You will be offered a blood test to tell you whether you are blood group rhesus negative or rhesus positive. If you are rhesus negative you may need extra care to reduce the risk of rhesus disease.

Rhesus disease can happen if you are rhesus negative and pregnant and involves your body developing antibodies that attack the baby's blood cells. This can lead to anaemia and jaundice in the baby.

If you are rhesus negative, you may be offered injections during pregnancy to prevent you from producing these antibodies. This is safe for both mother and baby.
Iron deficiency anaemia

Iron deficiency anaemia makes you tired and less able to cope with loss of blood when you give birth.

You should be offered screening for iron deficiency anaemia at your booking appointment and at 28 weeks.

If tests show you have iron deficiency anaemia, you'll probably be offered iron and folic acid.

Gestational diabetes

You may be at higher risk of developing diabetes in pregnancy (gestational diabetes) if you:

    are overweight
    have had diabetes in pregnancy before
    have had a baby weighing 4.5kg (9.9lb) or more before
    have a close relative with diabetes
    have a south Asian, black or African Caribbean, or Middle Eastern family background

If you're considered to be at high risk for gestational diabetes, you may be offered a test called the OGTT (oral glucose tolerance test). This involves drinking a sugary drink and having blood tests. 

The OGTT is done when you're between 24 and 28 weeks pregnant. If you've had gestational diabetes before, you'll be offered:

    early self monitoring of blood glucose levels, or
    an OGTT earlier in pregnancy, soon after your booking visit, and another at 24 to 28 weeks if the first test is normal








Ultrasound scans in pregnancy

Ultrasound scans use sound waves to build a picture of the baby in the womb. The scans are painless, have no known side effects on mothers or babies, and can be carried out at any stage of pregnancy. Talk to your midwife, GP or obstetrician about any concerns you have.

Having a scan in pregnancy is usually a happy event, but be aware that ultrasound scans may detect some serious health conditions. It's your choice whether to have screening. Your midwife can discuss your options with you.

See If antenatal screening tests find something for more information on if a scan or other screening test suggests your baby may be more likely to have a condition.
What will happen at the scan?

Most scans are carried out by sonographers. The scan is carried out in a dimly lit room so the sonographer is able to get good images of your baby.

You'll be asked to lie on your back and reveal your tummy.

The sonographer will put ultrasound gel on your tummy, which makes sure there is good contact between the machine and your skin.

The sonographer passes a probe over your tummy and a picture of the baby will appear on the ultrasound screen.

During the exam, sonographers need to keep the screen in a position that gives them a good view of the baby.

The sonographer will carefully examine your baby's body. The sonographer may need to apply slight pressure on your tummy to get the best views of the baby.
How long will a scan take?

A scan usually takes around 20 to 30 minutes. However, the sonographer may not be able to get good views if your baby is lying in an awkward position or moving around a lot.

If it's difficult to get a good image, the scan may take longer or have to be repeated at another time.
Can an ultrasound scan harm me or my baby?

There are no known risks to the baby or the mother from having an ultrasound scan, but it's important that you consider carefully whether to have the scan or not.

This is because the scan can provide information that may mean you have to make further important decisions. For example, you may be offered further tests, such as amniocentesis, that have a risk of miscarriage.
When are scans offered?  

Hospitals in England offer at least 2 ultrasound scans during pregnancy:

    at 11 to 14 weeks
    and between 18 and 21 weeks

The first scan is called the 12-week scan. The sonographer estimates when your baby is due (the estimated date of delivery, or EDD) based on the baby's measurements.

The dating scan can include a nuchal translucency (NT) scan, which is part of the combined screening test for Down's syndrome, if you choose to have this screening.

The second scan offered during pregnancy is the 20-week screening scan. It usually takes place between 18 and 21 weeks of pregnancy. It's sometimes called the anomaly scan or mid-pregnancy scan. This scan checks for 11 physical conditions in your baby.

You may be offered more than 2 scans, depending on your health and the pregnancy.
When will I get the results?

The sonographer will be able to tell you the results of the scan at the time.
Do I have to have ultrasound scans?

No, not if you do not want to. Some people want to find out if their baby is more likely to have a condition, while others do not. The 12-week dating scan and 20-week screening scan will be offered to you, but you do not have to have them.

Your choice will be respected if you decide not to have the scans, and your antenatal care will continue as normal. You'll be given the chance to discuss it with your maternity team before making your decision.
What can an ultrasound scan be used for?

An ultrasound scan can be used to:

    check your baby's size – at the 12-week dating scan, this gives a better idea of how many weeks pregnant you are; your due date, which is originally calculated from the first day of your last period, may be adjusted according to the ultrasound measurements
    check whether you're having more than 1 baby
    detect some physical conditions
    show the position of your baby and the placenta – for example, when the placenta is low down in late pregnancy, a caesarean section may be advised
    check that the baby is growing normally – this is particularly important if you're carrying twins, or you've had problems in this pregnancy or a previous pregnancy

Can I bring family or friends with me when I have the scan?

Yes. You may like someone to come with you to the scan appointment.

Most hospitals do not allow children to attend scans as childcare is not usually available. Please ask your hospital about this before your appointment.

Remember, an ultrasound scan is an important medical examination and it is treated in the same way as any other hospital investigation. Ultrasound scans can sometimes find problems with the baby.
If everything appears normal, what happens next?

Most scans show that the baby is developing normally and no problems are found. This is because most babies are healthy. You can continue with your routine antenatal care.

Scans cannot pick up all health conditions so it's important to speak to a doctor or midwife if you're worried that something is not right.
If the scan shows your baby is more likely to have a condition, what happens next?

If the scan shows your baby is more likely to have a condition, the sonographer may ask for a second opinion from another member of staff. You might be offered another test to find out for certain if your baby has the condition.

If you're offered further tests, you will be given more information about them so you can decide whether or not you want to have them. You'll be able to discuss this with your midwife or consultant.

If necessary, you will be referred to a specialist, possibly in another hospital.
Can I find out the sex of my baby?

Finding out the sex of your baby is not offered as part of the national screening programme.

If you want to find out the sex of your baby, you may be able to during the 20-week screening scan but this depends on the policy of your hospital. Tell the sonographer at the start of the scan that you'd like to know your baby's sex.

Be aware, though, that it's not possible for the sonographer to be 100% certain about your baby's sex. For example, if your baby is lying in an awkward position, it may be difficult or impossible to tell.

Some hospitals have a policy of not telling patients the sex of their baby. Speak to your sonographer or midwife to find out more.
Can I have a picture of my baby?

You will need to check if your hospital provides this service. If they do, there may be a charge.
Video: What ha






12-week scan

If you're pregnant in England you'll be offered an ultrasound scan at around 10 to 14 weeks of pregnancy. This is called the dating scan. It's used to see how far along in your pregnancy you are and check your baby's development. The scan may also be part of a screening test for Down's syndrome.

Your midwife or doctor will book you a dating scan appointment. It will usually take place at your local hospital ultrasound department. Most scans are carried out by sonographers.

You may need to have a full bladder for this scan, as this makes the ultrasound image clearer. You can ask your midwife or doctor before the scan if this is the case. The dating scan usually takes about 20 minutes.

Find out more about what happens during a pregnancy ultrasound scan
12-week black and white dating scan image of a baby in the womb
Dating scan image
Credit:

Nic Cleave / Alamy Stock Photo https://www.alamy.com/stock-photo-12-twelve-week-ultrasound-scan-antenatal-photo-of-unborn-foetus-baby-18962836.html?pv=1&stamp=2&imageid=E0A8E3FE-D4B6-4EF5-9687-24C92C3FEA0F&p=74035&n=0&orientation=0&pn=1&searchtype=0&IsFromSearch=1&srch=foo%3dbar%26st%3d0%26pn%3d1%26ps%3d100%26sortby%3d2%26resultview%3dsortbyPopular%26npgs%3d0%26qt%3dB2RR84%26qt_raw%3dB2RR84%26lic%3d3%26mr%3d0%26pr%3d0%26ot%3d0%26creative%3d%26ag%3d0%26hc%3d0%26pc%3d%26blackwhite%3d%26cutout%3d%26tbar%3d1%26et%3d0x000000000000000000000%26vp%3d0%26loc%3d0%26imgt%3d0%26dtfr%3d%26dtto%3d%26size%3d0xFF%26archive%3d1%26groupid%3d%26pseudoid%3d788068%26a%3d%26cdid%3d%26cdsrt%3d%26name%3d%26qn%3d%26apalib%3d%26apalic%3d%26lightbox%3d%26gname%3d%26gtype%3d%26xstx%3d0%26simid%3d%26saveQry%3d%26editorial%3d1%26nu%3d%26t%3d%26edoptin%3d%26customgeoip%3d%26cap%3d1%26cbstore%3d1%26vd%3d0%26lb%3d%26fi%3d2%26edrf%3d0%26ispremium%3d1%26flip%3d0%26pl%3d
What is the purpose of the dating scan?

The purpose of the dating scan is to check:

    how many weeks pregnant you are and work out your due date (the estimated date of delivery, or EDD)
    whether you're expecting more than 1 baby
    that the baby is growing in the right place
    your baby's development

This scan can detect some health conditions, such as spina bifida.
Does screening for Down's syndrome happen at the dating scan?

This depends on whether you have agreed to have the screening and when the scan takes place. Screening for Down's syndrome will happen at the dating scan if:

    you have agreed to have screening for the condition
    the scan takes place between 10 and 14 weeks of pregnancy

The screening test for Down's syndrome used at this stage of pregnancy is called the combined test. It involves a blood test and measuring the fluid at the back of the baby's neck (nuchal translucency) with an ultrasound scan. This is sometimes called a nuchal translucency scan.

The nuchal translucency measurement can be taken during the dating scan. If you have agreed to have screening for Down's syndrome, the dating scan and the screening will usually happen at the same time.

You will also be offered screening for 2 rarer conditions called Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome.

Find out more about the screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome

You will not be offered the combined screening test if your dating scan happens after 14 weeks. Instead, you'll be offered another blood test between 14 and 20 weeks of pregnancy to screen for your chance of having a baby with Down's syndrome. This test is not quite as accurate as the combined test.












20-week screening scan

The 20-week screening scan, also called the anomaly scan, is an ultrasound scan to look for 11 different conditions in your baby. It also checks your baby's growth. It's usually done when you're between 18 and 21 weeks pregnant.
Why the 20-week scan is done

The 20-week scan is done to check if your baby could have a condition that affects their health and development.

Your baby will be checked for signs of 11 different conditions as part of the scan.

Some conditions can be seen more clearly than others, so the scan may not find everything. But screening is the best way to find any conditions, and help you and your doctors make the best decisions for you and your baby.

Your placenta and the blood flow in your uterus will also be checked.
Show the 11 conditions the scan checks for

Who the 20-week scan is for

A 20-week scan is always offered when you're pregnant. It's usually done when you're between 18 and 21 weeks pregnant.
How to get the 20-week scan

Your midwife will tell you how to book the 20-week scan. How you book depends on which area of the country you are in.

You may:

    be given a form to fill in after your first midwife appointment
    need to book the appointment after your 12-week scan
    need to call your local hospital to book the scan
    get a letter in the post with a prebooked appointment
    need to book the appointment using an app

You'll usually have the scan before you're 21 weeks pregnant, but you're able to have it up until you're 23 weeks pregnant in some cases.

You'll also be told if you need to have a full bladder before the scan.
Information:

If you've not had a 20-week scan and you're between 18 and 23 weeks pregnant, tell your midwife or GP.

It's your choice if you want to have a 20-week scan or not. The scan is the best way to find out if your baby has one of the 11 conditions, but not everyone wants this information. Talk to your midwife about your options.

If you decide not to have it but change your mind later, speak to your midwife or GP. They can tell you if you're still able to have the scan.
Preparing for the 20-week scan

There are things you can do to prepare for your 20-week scan.
Do

    arrive for your appointment early

    wear loose clothing that's easy to move to get to your tummy

    take out a belly piercing, if you have one

    bring your maternity notes with you, if you have paper notes

    make sure you have a full bladder before the scan, if you've been told to

    check with the hospital or clinic before your appointment if you'll need to pay for pictures of your baby

Important

You can bring someone to the scan with you, but most hospitals do not allow children. Check with the clinic or hospital before your appointment.
How the 20-week scan is done

Your 20-week scan is usually done at a local hospital, clinic or health centre by a trained healthcare professional.

The ultrasound scan usually takes around 30 minutes. There's no known risk to you, or your baby, from the scan.

The scan can sometimes take longer if your baby is moving around a lot or is not in the right position to get clear pictures.

If this happens, you may be asked to go for a walk or eat something before coming back after a short break so all the checks can be done.

If it's still difficult to get clear pictures of your baby, you'll be offered another appointment before you're 23 weeks pregnant.

The scan cannot find all conditions. If you have any symptoms you're worried about or something does not feel right, it's important to tell your midwife.
During the scan
A healthcare professional holding a scanner on the tummy of a pregnant woman with white skin. An ultrasound image of a baby is visible on a screen.
Credit:

Chad Ehlers / Alamy Stock Photo https://www.alamy.com/male-doctor-using-probe-during-ultrasound-test-with-fetus-on-screen-image8705406.html?pv=1&stamp=2&imageid=209BC774-F1E4-401C-B75A-44AF9D861F55&p=2430&n=0&orientation=0&pn=1&searchtype=0&IsFromSearch=1&srch=foo%3dbar%26st%3d0%26pn%3d1%26ps%3d100%26sortby%3d2%26resultview%3dsortbyPopular%26npgs%3d0%26qt%3dAMDYKF%26qt_raw%3dAMDYKF%26lic%3d3%26mr%3d0%26pr%3d0%26ot%3d0%26creative%3d%26ag%3d0%26hc%3d0%26pc%3d%26blackwhite%3d%26cutout%3d%26tbar%3d1%26et%3d0x000000000000000000000%26vp%3d0%26loc%3d0%26imgt%3d0%26dtfr%3d%26dtto%3d%26size%3d0xFF%26archive%3d1%26groupid%3d%26pseudoid%3d788068%26a%3d%26cdid%3d%26cdsrt%3d%26name%3d%26qn%3d%26apalib%3d%26apalic%3d%26lightbox%3d%26gname%3d%26gtype%3d%26xstx%3d0%26simid%3d%26saveQry%3d%26editorial%3d1%26nu%3d%26t%3d%26edoptin%3d%26customgeoip%3d%26cap%3d1%26cbstore%3d1%26vd%3d0%26lb%3d%26fi%3d2%26edrf%3d0%26ispremium%3d1%26flip%3d0%26pl%3d

    The ultrasound scan will take place in a dimly lit room to get clear pictures of your baby.
    You'll be asked to lie on a couch and to lift or lower your clothing so the healthcare professional can see and touch your tummy.
    Tissue paper will be tucked into your clothing before a cold gel is put on your tummy.
    The healthcare professional will move a handheld device called a probe over your tummy so they can see a picture of your baby and check their body. This may be uncomfortable.
    They may be quiet while they look closely at your baby's bones, heart, brain, spinal cord, face, kidneys and tummy. They'll also check your placenta and the blood flow in your uterus.
    Sometimes the healthcare professional may ask another member of the team to check the picture of your baby.
    You may be asked if you'd like to know the sex of your baby.

Getting the results of your 20-week scan

You'll be told the results of the 20-week scan after the healthcare professional has done all the checks.

Most people will be told their baby does not have any signs of a condition.

But some people may be told their baby has signs of one of the conditions being checked for.
If your baby has signs of a condition

You'll be told if there are signs your baby may have a health condition after the scan.

If the ultrasound scan finds something, you may be offered more scans and tests, such as amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.

You'll be referred to a specialist, who will tell you more about the tests to help you decide if you want to have them.

These tests will be able to tell you if your baby definitely has a health condition and what this means for you and your baby.

Find out more about what happens if antenatal screening tests find something and about having a baby that might be born with a condition.




Screening tests in pregnancy
Video: Screening tests for you and your baby

This video shows which tests are available during pregnancy and after your baby has been born.
Displays the text version below the video
Plays the video with descriptive audio
Sign language options menu
Displays the sign language interpreter
Removes the sign language interpreter
Sign language settings
Media last reviewed: 14 March 2023
Media review due: 14 March 2026

You can watch translated versions of this video on Vimeo.

You'll be offered some screening tests during pregnancy to try to find any health conditions that could affect you or your baby.

The tests can help you make choices about further tests and care or treatment during your pregnancy or after your baby's born. All screening tests offered by the NHS are free.
What are screening tests?

Screening tests are used to find people at higher chance of a health problem.

This means they can get earlier, potentially more effective, treatment or make informed decisions about their health.

Screening tests are not perfect. Some people will be told that they or their baby have a higher chance of having a health condition when in fact they do not have the condition.

Also, a few people will be told that they or their baby have a lower chance of having a health condition when in fact they do have the condition.
What do screening tests involve?

The screening tests offered during pregnancy in England are either ultrasound scans or blood tests, or a combination of both.

Ultrasound scans may detect conditions such as spina bifida.

Blood tests can show whether you have a higher chance of inherited conditions such as sickle cell anaemia and thalassaemia, and whether you have infections like HIV, hepatitis B or syphilis.

Blood tests combined with scans can help find out how likely it is that the baby has Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome or Patau's syndrome.
What are the risks of screening tests?

Screening tests cannot harm you or the baby but it is important to consider carefully whether or not to have these tests.

Some screening tests in pregnancy can lead to difficult decisions for you.

For example, screening tests for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome or Patau's syndrome can lead to difficult decisions about whether to have a diagnostic test, such as amniocentesis, that carries a chance of miscarriage.

A diagnostic test tells you for certain whether you or your baby has the condition.

If diagnostic tests show your baby has a condition, this can lead to a decision about whether you want to continue or end the pregnancy.

Having a further test or ending the pregnancy will always be your decision, and healthcare professionals will support you whatever you decide.

It's up to you whether or not you choose to have screening tests in pregnancy.
When will I be offered screening?

Different screening tests are offered at different times during pregnancy.

The screening test for sickle cell and thalassaemia should be offered as early as possible before 10 weeks of pregnancy.

It's recommended that screening blood tests for HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis should happen as early as possible in pregnancy.

This is so you can be offered specialist care and treatment to protect your health and reduce the chance of your baby getting infected.

These blood tests should not be delayed until the first scan appointment.

You'll be offered screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome around the time of your dating scan, which happens when you're around 11 to 14 weeks pregnant.

You'll be offered screening to check your baby's development at a 20-week scan when you're around 18 to 21 weeks pregnant.

Will screening tests give me a definite answer?

This depends what the screening tests are looking for.
Yes

Screening tests for HIV, hepatitis B and syphilis are very accurate, and will tell for certain whether you have these infections.

If the test is positive, you'll be offered further tests and examinations by specialist doctors to find out the treatment you need.
No

Screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome cannot say for certain whether your baby has the condition. It tells you if your baby has a lower or higher chance of having the condition.

If your baby has a higher chance of a condition, you'll be offered a diagnostic test that gives a more definite "yes" or "no" answer.

Screening tests for sickle cell and thalassaemia will tell you for certain whether you're a carrier or have these conditions. They will not tell you whether or not your baby has the condition.

If you or the baby's father is a carrier or has the condition, you'll be offered diagnostic tests to find out if your baby is affected.
Do I have to have screening?

No – it's up to you whether you have a screening test. It's a personal choice that only you can make.

You can discuss each of the screening tests you're offered with your midwife or doctor and decide whether or not it's right for you.

Some of the screening tests you'll be offered are recommended by the NHS.

These include:

    blood tests for infectious diseases
    eye screening if you have pre-existing diabetes (not gestational diabetes)
    newborn screening tests

This is because the results from these tests can help make sure that you or your baby get urgent treatment for serious conditions.
What screening tests will I be offered in pregnancy?

Find out more about each of the different screening tests:

    screening for infectious diseases (hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis)
    screening for inherited conditions (sickle cell, thalassaemia and other haemoglobin disorders)
    screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome
    screening for 11 physical conditions (20-week scan)

Some screening tests will also be offered to your baby after they're born:

    newborn physical examination
    newborn hearing screening
    newborn blood spot screening

Your midwife or GP should give you a booklet about antenatal and newborn screening called screening tests for you and your baby.See GOV.UK’s guidance on screening tests for you and your baby.
Confidentiality

By law, everyone working in, or on behalf of, the NHS must respect your privacy and keep all information about you safe.

The NHS Constitution sets out how the NHS should handle your records to protect your privacy.

In addition, there are laws in place to ensure confidentiality is maintained. Screening records are only shared with staff who need to see them.

Sometimes information is used for audit research purposes to improve screening outcomes and services. Information about this will be provided when you're screened.

Some private companies also provide screening tests that you have to pay for. The NHS cannot guarantee the quality of private screening.

Find out more about private screening.




Screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome

Screening your baby for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome is offered when you're between 10 and 20 weeks pregnant. It's done using a blood test and an ultrasound scan.
Why screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome is done

Screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome is offered to find out how likely it is that your baby has any of these 3 conditions:

    Down's syndrome (trisomy 21)
    Edwards' syndrome (trisomy 18)
    Patau's syndrome (trisomy 13)

It's the best way to find any of these conditions, but having screening is your choice.

Some people want to find out if their baby has one of the conditions and some do not. It may lead to very personal decisions about your pregnancy.

You can discuss the test with health professionals and decide, based on your own circumstances, if you want to have it.
Who screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome is for

Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome screening is offered if you're pregnant.

It's usually done when you're between 10 and 14 weeks pregnant.
How screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome is done

The first screening test for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome is called the combined test.

There are 2 parts to the combined test:

    a blood test when you're between 10 and 14 weeks pregnant, with blood taken from your arm
    an ultrasound to measure the fluid at the back of your baby's neck during your 12-week scan (dating scan), when you're between 11 and 14 weeks pregnant

If you choose to have the combined test, the 2 parts are usually done at the same time, although they may be done separately.
The quadruple test

If you're more than 14 weeks pregnant, you'll be offered the quadruple (quad) test instead.

This is a blood test done when you're between 14 and 20 weeks pregnant. The quad test checks for Down's syndrome but is not as accurate as the combined test.

Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome will also be checked for during your 20-week screening scan, if you choose to have it.

There are no known risks to you or your baby from the blood tests or scans for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome.
Information:

Find out about the 12-week scan (dating scan) and 20-week screening scan, including why they're done and how to prepare for them.
How to get screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome

You'll usually be given information about screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome at your first midwife appointment (sometimes called your booking appointment).

You can choose to check for:

    all 3 conditions
    Down's syndrome only
    Edwards' and Patau's syndromes only – these are always done as a joint test
    none of the conditions

Your midwife or doctor may book the appointments for you or tell you how to book the appointments yourself.

The screening is offered to everyone who's pregnant, but it's your choice if you want to have it.

It's the best way to see if there's a higher chance your baby has any of the conditions, but not everyone wants this information.

If you decide not to have the screening but change your mind later, speak to your midwife or GP. They can tell you if you're still able to have it.
Information:

If you're between 10 and 14 weeks pregnant and have not been offered screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome, tell your midwife or GP.
Getting the results of screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome

You should get the results of Down's syndrome, Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome screening within 2 weeks of having the tests.

You may get them by letter, or someone may contact you by phone or in person, depending on what the result is.

The possible results are:

    lower chance of the condition – most people will get this result
    higher chance of the condition

You'll get a single result for Down's syndrome, and a joint result for Edwards' syndrome and Patau's syndrome. You'll only get the results you asked for when you decided to have the test.
Information:

If you've not had your baby's results within 2 weeks of having the screening tests, speak to your midwife, health visitor or GP.









Screening for hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis

During your pregnancy, you'll be offered a blood test for 3 infectious diseases: hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis. This is part of routine antenatal screening, which is recommended for every pregnancy.

You will usually be offered the blood test at your booking appointment with a midwife.

The blood test needs to be done as early as possible in pregnancy, ideally by 10 weeks. This is so treatment can be started early, if you need it, to reduce the risk of passing the infection on to your baby.

If you already know you have HIV or hepatitis B, you'll need early specialist appointments to plan your care in pregnancy.

If your partner has HIV, hepatitis B or syphilis, tell your midwife as soon as possible.

Hepatitis B, HIV and syphilis can all be passed to your baby during pregnancy and birth.

Hepatitis B

Hepatitis B affects the liver and can cause immediate (acute) and long-term (chronic) illness. It's passed on in blood and other body fluids, for example through sexual contact or sharing infected needles.

If you have hepatitis B, you'll be offered specialist care.

If your baby completes a course of vaccinations in their first year, this greatly reduces their risk of developing hepatitis B.

HIV

HIV weakens the immune system, making it difficult to fight off infections.

If left untreated, it can lead to AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).

HIV is passed on in blood and other body fluids through sexual contact or infected needles.

HIV can be passed on to your baby during pregnancy, birth or breastfeeding if it's not treated.
Syphilis

Syphilis is usually passed on through close contact with a syphilis sore during sex. It can also be passed on to a baby during pregnancy.

If untreated, syphilis can cause serious health problems for your baby, or cause miscarriage or stillbirth.

Syphilis is treated with antibiotics. The earlier it's treated, the lower the risk of passing it on to the baby is.

How is the test done and are there any risks?

A blood sample is taken from your arm. There are no risks associated with this test, either for you or your baby.
Do I need to have this test?

It's your choice to be tested for any or all of these infections.

The tests are recommended to:

    protect your health through early treatment and care
    reduce any risk of passing an infection on to your baby, partner or other family members

If you test positive for hepatitis B, HIV or syphilis, your partner and other family members may be offered a test for the infection.
What if I decide not to have the blood test for any of the infectious diseases?

If you decide not to have the test in early pregnancy, you'll be seen by a specialist midwife and offered screening again before you are 20 weeks pregnant. The midwife will discuss the benefits of screening for these infections.

You can ask to have a test for hepatitis B, HIV or syphilis at any time if you change your sexual partner or think you're at risk.
Your results

Your midwife will usually discuss your results with you either before or at your next antenatal visit and record them in your notes.

A specialist midwife will contact you if you have tested positive for hepatitis B, HIV or syphilis. This is to arrange appointments to discuss your results and organise a referral for specialist care services.

The specialist care team will offer you further tests and examinations to fully assess your condition, and the treatment and care you'll need.

Care and treatment if you have hepatitis B, HIV or syphilis
Hepatitis B

If you have hepatitis B, you'll receive specialist care throughout your pregnancy and after the baby is born. 

Your partner and any other children you have should also be offered a test for infection, and vaccinations if needed.

To prevent the baby getting hepatitis B, they will need vaccinations at the following times:

    within 24 hours of birth (with an injection of antibodies if required)
    4 weeks
    8 weeks
    12 weeks
    16 weeks
    1 year, with a blood test to check if infection has been avoided

It's very important that the baby has all 6 doses of the vaccine. The doses at 8, 12 and 16 weeks will be given as part of their routine infant immunisations.
HIV

The risk of passing HIV to the baby can be greatly reduced by:

    specialist care and treatment
    medicine
    planned care for the birth
    not breastfeeding

Your partner and any other children you have should also be offered a test.
Syphilis

If you have syphilis, you will need urgent referral to a specialist care team. Treatment is usually a course of antibiotics.

Your care team will also offer to test your partner to see if they need treatment as well so that you do not get reinfected.

Your baby may need to be examined and given antibiotics after birth.
After your test

You can still get these infections during pregnancy, even after a negative test result. Talk to your midwife or GP if you're worried about anything.

You can catch sexually transmitted infections during pregnancy if you have unprotected sex.

You can also get HIV and hepatitis B if you inject illegal drugs and share needles.

Remember, you can ask to be tested for hepatitis B, HIV or syphilis at any time during pregnancy.











Screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia

Sickle cell disease (SCD) and thalassaemia are inherited blood disorders.

If you're a carrier of the sickle cell or thalassaemia gene, you can pass these health conditions on to your baby.

All pregnant women in England are offered a blood test to find out if they carry a gene for thalassaemia.

Those at high risk of being a sickle cell carrier are offered a test for sickle cell.

If the mother is found to be a carrier, screening is also offered to the father. 

This test should be offered before you're 10 weeks pregnant. It's important the test is done early.

If you find out you're a carrier, you and your partner will have the option of further tests to know if your baby will be affected.
About sickle cell and thalassaemia

Sickle cell disease and thalassaemia affect haemoglobin, a part of the blood that carries oxygen around the body.

People who have these health conditions need specialist care throughout their lives.
Sickle cell disease

People with sickle cell:

    can have episodes of very severe pain
    can get serious life-threatening infections
    are usually anaemic (their bodies have difficulty carrying oxygen)

Babies with sickle cell disease can receive early treatment, including vaccinations and antibiotics.

This, along with support from their parents, will help prevent serious illness and allow the child to live a healthier life.

Find out more about sickle cell disease
Thalassaemia

People with thalassaemia can be affected by anaemia and some may need frequent blood transfusions, as well as injections and medicines throughout their lives.

Find out more about thalassaemia

There are also other less common, and less serious, haemoglobin disorders that may be found through screening.
Why could I be offered screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia early in pregnancy?

Screening is offered to find out if you're a carrier of a gene for sickle cell or thalassaemia and therefore likely to pass it on to your baby.

Genes are the codes in our bodies for things like eye colour and blood group.

Genes work in pairs: for everything we inherit, we get 1 gene from our mother and 1 gene from our father.

People only have sickle cell disease or thalassaemia if they inherit 2 unusual haemoglobin genes: 1 from their mother and 1 from their father.

People who inherit just 1 unusual gene are known as carriers or as having a trait.

Carriers are healthy and do not have the disease.

Sickle cell carriers can experience some problems in situations where their bodies might not get enough oxygen, such as having a general anaesthetic.

All carriers can pass the unusual gene on to their children.
When both parents are carriers

When both parents are carriers, each time they're expecting a child there's:

    a 1 in 4 chance of the child not having or carrying the disease
    a 2 in 4 chance of the child being a carrier
    a 1 in 4 chance of the child having the disease

Anyone can be a carrier of haemoglobin disease. But it's more common among people with ancestors from Africa, the Caribbean, the Mediterranean, India, Pakistan, south and southeast Asia, and the Middle East.

Read more about being a carrier of sickle cell disease or a carrier of thalassaemia.
What does the screening test involve?

Screening for sickle cell and thalassaemia involves a blood test. It's best to have the test before you're 10 weeks pregnant.

This is because you'll have the option of more tests to find out whether your baby will be affected if this first test shows you're a carrier of a blood disorder.

By having the test early, you and your partner can find out about all your options and make an informed decision if your baby is at risk of inheriting a blood disorder.

All pregnant women are offered a test for thalassaemia, but not all women are automatically offered a test for sickle cell.

In areas where haemoglobin diseases are more common, all women will automatically be offered a blood test for sickle cell.

In areas where haemoglobin diseases are less common, a questionnaire is used to identify your family origins and the origins of the baby's father.

If the questionnaire shows that either you or the baby's father is at risk of being a sickle cell carrier, you'll be offered a screening test.

You can ask to have the test even if your family origins do not suggest the baby would be at high risk of a haemoglobin disease.
Can this screening harm me or my baby?

No, the screening test cannot harm you or your baby, but it's important to think carefully about whether or not to have this test.

It can provide information that may mean you have to make further important decisions.

For example, you may be offered further tests that have a risk of miscarriage.
Do I have to have this screening test?

No, you do not have to have the screening test.

Some people want to find out if their baby could have sickle cell disease or thalassaemia, while others do not.
Getting your screening results

The test will tell you if you're a carrier or not, or whether you have the disease yourself.

You'll get the result of the blood test within a week. The person doing the test will discuss the arrangements for getting your results with you.

If you're found to be a carrier of sickle cell or thalassaemia, you'll be contacted by a specialist nurse or midwife counsellor for genetic counselling.
Further tests if the mother is a carrier
Tests to see if the father is a carrier

If the screening test finds that you're a carrier of a haemoglobin disease, your baby's father will also be offered a blood test.

If tests show the father is not a carrier, your baby will not have sickle cell disease or thalassaemia and you will not be offered further tests in pregnancy.

But there's still a 1 in 2 chance your baby could be a carrier and pass on the unusual gene to their children.

You can discuss the implications of you or your baby being a carrier with your GP or a healthcare professional at your local sickle cell and thalassaemia centre.

Find out more about screening for fathers on GOV.UK
Tests when both parents are carriers

If tests show your baby's father is also a carrier, there's a 1 in 4 chance that your baby can have the disease.

You'll be offered further tests called diagnostic tests to find out if your baby is affected.

A diagnostic test will tell you:

    if your baby has sickle cell disease, thalassaemia or another haemoglobin disorder
    if your baby is a carrier
    if your baby is completely unaffected

If the baby's father is not available and you have been identified as a carrier, you'll be offered a diagnostic test.

About 1 in 200 diagnostic tests result in a miscarriage. It's up to you whether or not to have the diagnostic test.

It can be a very difficult time if you're told you're at risk of having a baby with sickle cell disease or thalassaemia major. Talk to your midwife, specialist nurse or doctor about your options.

You can also get information and support from the charity Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC).

ARC has a helpline you can call for information and support on 020 7713 7486.

There are 2 types of diagnostic test.
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)

This is usually performed from 11 to 14 weeks of pregnancy.

A fine needle, usually put through the mother's tummy, is used to take a tiny sample of tissue from the placenta.

The cells from the tissue can be tested for sickle cell or thalassaemia.

Find out more about CVS
Amniocentesis

This is done from 15 weeks of pregnancy. 

A fine needle is passed through the mother's tummy into the uterus to collect a small sample of the fluid surrounding the baby.

The fluid contains some of the baby's cells, which can be tested for sickle cell or thalassaemia.

Find out more about amniocentesis
If you find out your baby has sickle cell disease or thalassaemia

If the result shows your baby has sickle cell disease or thalassaemia, you'll be offered an appointment with a health professional.

You'll be able to get information about the particular blood disorder the baby has inherited and talk through your choices.

Some blood disorders are more serious than others. Some women decide to continue with the pregnancy, while others decide they do not want to continue with the pregnancy and have a termination (abortion).

If you're faced with this choice, you'll get professional support to help you make a decision.

Support for parents is also available from the charity Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC).

If the test shows you're a carrier, there's a chance that other members of your family could be carriers, too.

You may want to encourage them to ask for a test, especially if they're planning to have a baby.

Find out more about if antenatal screening tests find something
What if I decide not to have screening?

If you choose not to have the screening test during pregnancy, your baby can still have screening for sickle cell disease as part of newborn blood spot screening a few days after the birth.
Can anyone have a test for sickle cell and thalassaemia?

Although testing for sickle cell and thalassaemia is only offered during pregnancy, anyone can ask their GP or local sickle cell and thalassaemia centre for a free test at any time.

If you or your partner are concerned you may be a carrier, perhaps because someone in your family has a blood disorder or is a carrier, it's a good idea to get tested before you start a family.

That way you can understand your risk of passing on a blood disorder to any children you have, and discuss options for a healthy pregnancy with your GP or another healthcare professional.
Finding out you're a carrier

If the test shows you're a carrier of sickle cell, thalassaemia or another haemoglobin variant, you'll be contacted by a specialist nurse or midwife counsellor for genetic counselling.

You'll get a specific carrier result depending on the unusual haemoglobin gene you have inherited.

You can find more detailed information about different types of carrier in these leaflets:

GOV.UK: Sickle cell carrier
GOV.UK: Beta thalassaemia carrier
GOV.UK: Delta beta thalassaemia carrier

GOV.UK: Haemoglobin O Arab carrier
GOV.UK: Haemoglobin C carrier
GOV.UK: Haemoglobin D carrier
GOV.UK: Haemoglobin E carrier
GOV.UK: Haemoglobin Lepore carrier

There's a chance that other members of your family could be carriers, too.

You may want to encourage them to ask for a test, especially if they're planning to have a baby.

They can ask their GP or local sickle cell and thalassaemia centre for a free test at any time.
What if I get pregnant and me or my partner is a carrier?
If 1 parent is a carrier

If you know that either you or your partner is a carrier of sickle cell or thalassaemia, the other parent should get tested as soon as possible if you want to understand your child's risk of inheriting one of these blood disorders so you can find out about all your options.
If both parents are carriers

If you're pregnant and already know that both you and your partner are carriers (for example, because you found out in a previous pregnancy), talk to your GP or midwife as soon as possible.

You'll then have the option of being offered a diagnostic test to find out if your baby's affected.

Read more about being a carrier of sickle cell disease or a carrier of thalassaemia.
Information about you

If it looks like you or your baby has sickle cell disease or thalassaemia, this information will be passed to the National Congenital Anomaly and Rare Diseases Registration Service (NCARDRS).

This helps the NHS sickle cell and thalassaemia screening programme improve screening services.

You can opt out of the register at any time by visiting the opt-out section of the National Disease Registration Service w








If antenatal screening tests find something

Most antenatal screening tests will not find anything, but there's a chance you'll be told your baby could be born with a condition.

If this happens to you, there's always support available.
Get as much information as you can

It can help to find out as much as you can about the condition your baby may have.

A specialist doctor (obstetrician) or midwife will explain what the screening results mean and talk to you about your options.
Your appointments

Your appointments should take place in a private and quiet space. But this can sometimes be difficult in a busy hospital.

You can bring your partner, a family member or friend with you.

It might help to write down any questions you have before you go. Ask the doctor or midwife to explain anything again if you need them to.
Information:

You could ask things like:

    Can you explain what my baby may have?
    What would that mean for my baby?
    Will we need any special care or treatment before birth?
    What would life be like for my baby if they have this condition?

Read more about conditions screened for in pregnancy

Next steps

You may be offered a further screening test called non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), which is a blood test.

You may also be offered diagnostic tests that can check if your baby definitely has the condition screening tests have said they might have.

The tests you may be offered are:

    amniocentesis
    chorionic villus sampling (CVS)

You may also have further scans.

It's up to you to decide if you want to do any further tests. You can discuss this with a doctor or midwife.
Important

In most cases, you'll find out if your baby has the condition they were tested for. But in some cases this may not be possible.

Read more about getting amniocentesis results or chorionic villus sampling (CVS) results.
Making a decision to continue with or end your pregnancy

This can be a very difficult decision. You may find you feel differently from one day to the next.

You do not have to make this decision on your own. Speak to your doctor, midwife, family and friends about your options.

You have time to think about your decision – whatever you decide, you'll have support.

Read more about what may happen if you:

    have a baby that might be born with a condition
    end your pregnancy (have a termination)

Support is available

It can help to speak to:

    your partner, family or friends
    a midwife or specialist doctor
    a local support group
    charities that support families with your baby's condition
    a counsellor – you do not need a referral from your GP (find out more about counselling)

Charities you can contact

    Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC) – a charity who can support you in your decision
    Down's Syndrome Association
    Sickle Cell Society
    Support Organisation for Trisomy 13 and Trisomy 18 (SOFT UK) – for families affected by Patau's syndrome (Trisomy 13) and Edwards' syndrome (Trisomy 18)
    UK Thalassaemia Society

More in Pregnancy (antenatal) care, checks and screening tests 





Having a baby that might be born with a condition

If you continue with your pregnancy after screening has found something, you might need extra care.

The care you and your baby need depends on the condition they have.

Support is available for any condition your baby has.
Important

Speak to a doctor or midwife to get as much information as possible about your baby's condition and what treatment they might need.
Your pregnancy care

You'll be offered all the regular checks and tests everyone has when they're pregnant.

And you'll be cared for by a team that's specially trained to support you and your baby's needs.

But depending on your baby's condition and what's available in your area, you may need to:

    go for extra scans or appointments
    see specialist doctors (obstetricians or paediatricians)
    travel further to a specialist hospital for appointments

You can bring your partner, a family member or friend with you.

It might help to write down any questions you have before you go.
Information:

You could ask things like:

    Will we need extra support during the birth?
    Will my baby need treatment straight after birth?
    Where will this treatment take place?
    Will my baby need to stay in hospital?
    If they do, how long will that be for?
    How will my baby develop?

Your birth plan

Everyone who's pregnant can make a birth plan. You'll usually talk this through with a midwife early in your pregnancy.

You can talk about:

    who you want with you during labour
    your options around pain relief
    your positions for labour and birth
    where's best to have your baby
    what care you and your baby may get

But depending on your baby's condition, you may need to make changes to your plan.

The charity SOFT UK can help you with making a birth plan if your baby might be born with a condition
Giving birth

You may have a higher chance of going into labour early. Or your baby may need more support when they're born.

This may mean you'll need to:

    give birth at a specialist hospital with intensive and special care baby units – the charity Bliss has more about the different levels of neonatal care
    give birth at hospital in a unit led by a doctor (obstetrician)
    have a caesarean instead of a vaginal birth
    have your baby earlier than your due date (by being induced or having a caesarean)

Speak to a doctor or midwife to find out your options.

The team are there to make sure you and your baby have all the support you need.

Read about what happens during labour and giving birth
After your baby is born

What happens after your baby is born depends on their condition and how severe it is. Your baby may need to:

    stay in hospital for a while after they're born
    have further treatment from a specialist doctor
    have further tests and checks as they get older

A doctor or midwife will explain the next steps for your baby's care.
Support is available

It can help to speak to:

    your partner, family or friends
    your midwife or specialist doctor
    a local support group
    charities for your baby's condition
    a counsellor – you do not need a referral from your GP (find out more about how to see a counsellor)









Termination for fetal anomaly

If tests show your baby has a serious condition (an anomaly), find out as much as you can from your doctor about the condition and how it might affect your baby.

Hearing the diagnosis can be very shocking and you may find it hard to take in.

You may need to spend some time thinking things through and go back and talk to the doctor with your partner or someone close to you.
Information:

The charity Antenatal Results and Choices (ARC) offers information and support for people who have received a diagnosis after antenatal screening.

You can call the ARC helpline on (020) 7713 7486 Monday to Friday, 10am to 5.30pm, or email info@arc-uk.org for an evening call from 8pm to 10pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays.

You can also text 07908 683004.

You may be offered a termination (abortion) to end the pregnancy.

Some couples wish to continue with the pregnancy and prepare for the needs of their newborn baby, while others decide to terminate the pregnancy.
What happens

There are 2 main types of termination:

    medical termination – taking medicine to end the pregnancy
    surgical termination – a procedure to remove the pregnancy

You're likely to have bleeding and cramping for several days after having either type of termination.

You should be offered a choice of which method you would prefer whenever possible.

A medical termination allows for a detailed examination of the baby (post-mortem) that can help find out the exact nature of the baby's condition.

Tests can be done after both a medical and surgical termination to see if the baby was carrying a genetic disorder.

This may help your doctor to determine the chance of you having another baby with a similar problem.
Medical termination

A medical termination involves taking medicine to end the pregnancy. It doesn't require surgery or an anaesthetic, and can be used at any stage of pregnancy.

It involves the following steps:

    Taking a medicine to stop an essential pregnancy hormone. Without this hormone, the pregnancy can't continue.
    Usually 24 to 48 hours later, you have another appointment where you take a second medicine – a tablet that you either take by mouth or put inside your vagina. You may need more than 1 dose.
    The lining of the womb breaks down, causing bleeding and loss of the pregnancy. This may take several hours and can be painful. You'll be offered pain relief to help.

When a medical termination is carried out after 9 weeks of pregnancy, you may need to stay overnight in the clinic or hospital.

Occasionally, the pregnancy doesn't pass completely and an operation is needed to remove it.
Surgical termination

There are 2 ways you can have a surgical termination.

It usually involves having a local anaesthetic (where the area is numbed), conscious sedation (where you're relaxed but awake) or general anaesthetic (where you're asleep).
Vacuum or suction aspiration

This can be used before 14 weeks of pregnancy. It involves inserting a tube through your vagina and into the entrance to the womb (the cervix). The pregnancy is then removed using suction.

Vacuum aspiration takes 5 to 10 minutes, and you can usually go home a few hours later.
Dilatation and evacuation (D&E)

This is used from 14 weeks of pregnancy. It involves inserting special instruments called forceps through the cervix and into the womb to remove the pregnancy.

D&E is usually carried out under sedation or general anaesthetic. It normally takes 10 to 20 minutes, and you might be able to go home the same day.
Seeing and holding your baby

You may wish to think beforehand about whether you want to see and perhaps hold your baby, and whether you want to give your baby a name.

If you don't want to see the baby, you could ask hospital staff to take a photograph for you in case you change your mind in the future. The photograph can be kept in your notes.

Holding your baby or having a photograph is only possible with a medical termination of pregnancy.
Having a funeral

You may wish to think about having a burial or cremation for your baby. Talk to the doctor, nurse or midwife at your hospital about your options.
After a termination

It can help to talk. If your family and friends find it difficult to understand what you're going through, you could make contact with people who have had a similar experience.

The charities Antenatal Results and Choices and Tom









Antenatal care with twins

When you're expecting twins or triplets, it's important that you attend all your appointments because of the increased risks with this type of pregnancy.

Your antenatal team should be experienced in caring for women having twins or triplets.
Check-ups and scans in a twin pregnancy

The number of tests and scans you'll be offered will depend on the type of twins or triplets you're having.

Women with multiple pregnancies should be offered an ultrasound scan at around 11 to 14 weeks. It's important to attend this appointment.

This is the best time to find out what type of placenta and membranes your twins have (chorionicity) and check your dates.

You can also have a nuchal translucency test for Down's syndrome done at the same time if you wish.

Find out more about screening for Down's syndrome

Between 16 and 20 weeks, you should be offered a cervical length scan, which helps to assess your risk of giving birth prematurely. If the scan finds that you have a short cervix, you may be offered progesterone tablets to take once a day until 34 weeks.

You'll also be offered a scan, called an anomaly scan, at 20 weeks to check that your babies are developing normally.
Different types of twins

For medical purposes, there are 3 types of twins. These apply to triplets too, although a triplet pregnancy will be more complex than a twin one.

The 3 types are:

    dichorionic diamniotic (DCDA) twins – each has their own separate placenta and separate sac
    monochorionic diamniotic (MCDA) twins – share a single placenta but have their own separate sacs
    monochorionic monoamniotic (MCMA) twins – share both a placenta and a sac – this is a much rarer type of pregnancy

All non-identical twins are DCDA.

Most identical twins are MCDA, but some will be DCDA. Very rarely identical twins can be MCMA.
What extra care may I need?

If your babies are MCDA, you can expect more scans and monitoring, as this type of twins has the highest risk of twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), which is an abnormality of the placenta.

You may be referred to a regional centre for foetal medicine to be seen by a specialist doctor.

If your babies are MCMA, you'll also have frequent scans. With this type of twins there's often some cord entanglement, which can cause complications.

These types of twins are rare, and you can expect to receive specialist care and close monitoring.

If your babies are DCDA, the risks to their health in the womb are much lower. You'll usually be scanned every 4 weeks.

It's important to attend all your appointments so any problems can be picked up early and treated if necessary.
Risks in twin pregnancies

While most multiple pregnancies are healthy and result in healthy babies, there are more risks to be aware of when you're pregnant with 2 or more babies.

If you're pregnant with more than 1 baby, you're at higher risk of pregnancy complications, such as iron deficiency anaemia and pre-eclampsia.

Make sure you go to all your antenatal appointments so any problems can be picked up early and treated if necessary.
Premature birth

Twins and triplets have a higher risk of being born prematurely (before 37 weeks) and having a low birthweight. Your risk is also increased if you've given birth prematurely before, or if a cervical length scan found that you have a short cervix.

Most twins and triplets are born prematurely.

Around 6 in 10 twins are born before 37 weeks. Almost 8 in 10 triplets are born before 35 weeks.
Planned birth

If you are expecting twins or triplets, you will be offered a planned birth at:

    37 weeks for twins with a placenta each
    36 weeks for identical twins sharing a placenta
    35 weeks for an uncomplicated triplet pregnancy
    32-33 weeks for MCMA twins

It can be dangerous for twin and triplet pregnancies to carry on after the planned birth dates. Plans for the birth will be discussed with you taking into account your needs and preferences.

If you turn down the offer of a planned birth, you will be offered weekly appointments with an obstetrician and weekly ultrasound scans plus a foetal growth scan every 2 weeks.

Your obstetric team will work closely with you throughout your pregnancy and after your babies are born to help make sure you and your babies are safe and healthy.
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome

Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) affects identical twins who share a placenta (monochorionic).

The risk is higher for MCDA twins, but it can happen in MCMA twins, too.

It's caused by abnormal connecting blood vessels in the twins' placenta.

This results in an imbalanced blood flow from 1 twin (known as the donor) to the other (recipient), leaving 1 baby with a greater blood volume than the other.

TTTS affects 10 to 15% of monochorionic twins and can have serious consequences.

You'll need to discuss your individual case with a doctor, as what works in one TTTS pregnancy may not be appropriat












Pregnant with twins

Fertility treatments and the fact pregnancies are happening later in life has made multiple births more common.
Different types of twins

One-third of all twins will be identical and two-thirds non-identical.
Identical twins

Identical (monozygotic) twins happen when a single egg (zygote) is fertilised.

The egg then divides in 2, creating identical twins who share the same genes.

Identical twins are always the same sex, so if your twins are identical, you'll have 2 girls or 2 boys.
Non-identical twins

Non-identical (dizygotic) twins happen when 2 separate eggs are fertilised and then implant into the womb (uterus).

These non-identical twins are no more alike than any other 2 siblings.

Non-identical twins are more common. The babies may be of the same sex or different sexes.
Are you carrying twins?

You might think you're carrying more than 1 baby if:

    you seem bigger than you should be for your dates
    twins run in your family
    you have had fertility treatment

It's usually possible to find out if you're having twins through your 12-week scan.

At the scan, you should be told whether the babies share a placenta (meaning they're identical) or if they have 2 separate placentas (meaning they can be identical or not).

If this is not clear from the first scan, you should be offered another one.
What causes twins?

Nobody knows what causes identical (monozygotic) twins. Everyone has the same chance of having identical twins: about 1 in 250.

Identical twins do not run in families. But there are some factors that make having non-identical twins more likely:

    non-identical twins are more common in some ethnic groups, with the highest rate among Nigerians and the lowest among Japanese
    if you’re pregnant and over 35 you’re more likely to have non-identical twins because you’re more likely to release more than 1 egg during ovulation
    non-identical twins run on the mother's side of the family, probably because of an inherited tendency to release more than 1 egg

IVF can increase the chance of twins, as more than 1 embryo may be transferred.
How can I tell if my twins are identical?

The most accurate way to tell if twins are identical is through a DNA test. This can only be done after your babies are born.

The placenta could also provide clues. If your first ultrasound scan is done before 14 weeks, it should be possible to tell accurately what kind of placenta your twins have.

Otherwise, the placenta can be examined after your babies are born.

For more information on this and birth options, read about giving birth to twins or more.

Read more about the different types of twins on the Twins Trust website.






1st trimester pregnancy: What to expect
The first trimester of pregnancy can be overwhelming. Understand the changes you might experience and how to take care of yourself during this exciting time.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Feb. 27, 2024

During the first few months of pregnancy, amazing changes happen quickly. This part of pregnancy is called the first trimester. Knowing what physical and emotional changes to expect can help you face the months ahead with confidence.
Your body

Your first symptom of pregnancy might have been a missed period. But you can expect other physical changes in the coming weeks, including:

    Tender, swollen breasts. Soon after you become pregnant, hormonal changes might make your breasts sensitive or sore. You'll likely have less discomfort after a few weeks as your body adjusts to hormone changes.
    Upset stomach with or without vomiting. Feeling like vomiting during pregnancy is known as morning sickness. It's common, and it can strike at any time of the day or night. Morning sickness often begins between 4 to 9 weeks into a pregnancy. This might be due to rising hormone levels. To help relieve an upset stomach, try these tips:
        Avoid having an empty stomach. Eat slowly and in small amounts every 1 to 2 hours.
        Choose bland foods that are low in fat. Some examples are bananas, rice, applesauce and toast. Include lean proteins such as low- or no-fat dairy, nuts, nut butters and seeds.
        Foods that contain ginger might help settle your stomach.
        Stay away from foods or smells that make your upset stomach worse.
        Sip plenty of cold, clear fluids.

    Call your healthcare professional if your upset stomach or vomiting becomes worse.
    More urination. You might find yourself urinating more often than usual. The amount of blood in the body increases during pregnancy. This causes the kidneys to process extra fluid that ends up in the bladder.
    Fatigue. It's common to feel very tired during early pregnancy as levels of the hormone progesterone rise. Rest as much as you can. Take a 15-minute nap during the day if you can. A healthy diet and exercise might boost your energy.
    Food cravings and dislikes. When you're pregnant, your sense of taste might change. Some smells may seem stronger too. To help, try using a fan when you cook. Ask a family member or partner to take out the trash if possible. Like most other symptoms of pregnancy, food preferences are due to hormone changes.
    Heartburn. Pregnancy hormones slow down the digestion of food. The hormones also relax the valve between the stomach and esophagus. This can let stomach acid leak into your esophagus, causing heartburn. To prevent heartburn:
        Eat small, frequent meals.
        Sip drinks in between meals.
        Don't eat fried foods, citrus fruits, chocolate or spicy foods.
        Don't lie down right after a meal.
        Try not to eat or drink within a few hours of going to bed.

    Talk with your healthcare professional if these steps don't give you enough relief. Safe medicines are available for heartburn.

    Constipation. High levels of the hormone progesterone can slow the movement of food through the digestive system. This can cause fewer or painful bowel movements. So can the growing uterus, which may put pressure on the bowels.

    To prevent or relieve constipation, eat plenty of foods with fiber. These include fresh or dried fruit, raw vegetables, and whole-grain cereals and bread. Drink lots of fluids too, especially water and prune juice or other fruit juices. Cut back on drinks with caffeine. Regular physical activity also helps. Talk with your healthcare professional about stool softeners if needed.

Your emotions

Pregnancy might make you feel delighted, anxious, excited and exhausted — sometimes all at once. Even if you're thrilled about being pregnant, a new baby can add stress to your life.

It's natural to worry about your baby's health, your adjustment to parenthood and the financial demands of raising a child. If you're employed, you might worry about how to balance the demands of family and career. You also may have mood swings. What you're feeling is common. Take care of yourself and look to loved ones for understanding and support. If your mood changes become serious or intense, see your healthcare professional. Also get a checkup if you feel moody, sad or overwhelmed for longer than two weeks.
Prenatal care

You might choose to get care from various healthcare professionals during your pregnancy. These professionals may include a family doctor, obstetrician, nurse-midwife or other pregnancy specialist. Whoever you choose to see, your healthcare professional can treat, educate and reassure you throughout your pregnancy.

Your first pregnancy checkup focuses on:

    Checking your overall health.
    Finding any risk factors that could affect the health of you or your baby.
    Figuring out how far along the pregnancy is, also called your baby's gestational age.

Your healthcare professional asks detailed questions about your health history. Be honest. If you're not comfortable talking about your health history in front of your partner, schedule a private appointment. Also expect to learn about first trimester screening for chromosomal abnormalities.

You'll likely have checkups every four weeks for about the first 28 weeks of pregnancy. You may need checkups more or less often. It depends on your health and medical history. During these appointments, talk about any concerns you might have about pregnancy, childbirth or life with a newborn. Remember, no question is silly or trivial — and the answers can help you take care of yourself and your baby.
Pregnancy book cover





2nd trimester pregnancy: What to expect
The second trimester of pregnancy is often the most enjoyable. Find out how to relieve common symptoms — and consider ways to prepare for what's ahead.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Feb. 07, 2025

The second trimester of pregnancy often brings a renewed sense of well-being. The worst of the nausea often is gone. And the baby isn't big enough to cause too much discomfort. Also, this is the trimester when you may feel the baby move.

But other pregnancy changes are coming. Here's what to expect.
Your body

The second three months of pregnancy, called the second trimester, often involves these physical changes:

    Larger belly and breasts. As your uterus gets bigger to make room for the baby, your belly grows. Your breasts also keep getting bigger. Wear a bra with wide straps or a sports bra that supports the breasts well.
    Lower back pain. Hormonal changes and a growing uterus can cause your back to ache. Wear low-heeled shoes with good support. Don't wear high heels or flats. If you must stand for a time, rest one foot on a stool. This can ease the strain on your back.

    Braxton Hicks contractions. You might feel these mild contractions as a slight tightness in your belly that comes and goes. These contractions are more likely to happen in the afternoon or evening, after physical activity, or after sex. It can help to drink plenty of fluids and urinate often to empty your bladder.

    Contact your healthcare team if the contractions become regular and keep getting stronger. This could be a sign of preterm labor.

    Skin changes. Hormone changes during pregnancy cause you to have more cells with pigment, called melanin, in your skin. So you might see brown, tan or gray patches on your face. This is called melasma. You also might see a dark line down your belly called linea nigra.

    These skin changes are common. They often fade after the baby is born. But being in the sun can make these changes worse. When you're outdoors, use sunscreen.

    You also might see reddish-brown, black, silver or purple lines along your belly, breasts, buttocks or thighs. These are called stretch marks. You can't prevent them. But they mostly fade after the baby is born.

    Another skin change may be tiny veins that show up under the skin of your face and legs. These are called spider veins. They often fade after the baby is born.

    Changes in the nose. During pregnancy, your rising hormone levels cause your body to make more blood. This can make the inside of your nose swell and bleed easily. So your nose might be stuffy. And you might have nosebleeds.

    Saline drops or a saline rinse can help with this. Also, moisture helps. Drink fluids, use a machine that puts moisture in the air, called a humidifier, and put petroleum jelly around the edges of your nostrils to help skin stay moist.
    Dental issues. During pregnancy, flossing and brushing can make your gums bleed. Rinse with salt water and use a softer toothbrush. The acid from vomiting can affect your tooth enamel and make you more likely to get cavities. Keep brushing your teeth and flossing regularly during pregnancy.
    Dizziness. Pregnancy causes changes in blood flow that might leave you dizzy. To keep from getting dizzy, drink plenty of fluids, don't stand for long periods, and move slowly when you stand up or change position. When you feel dizzy, lie down on your side. It might help to wear support hose.

    Leg cramps. Leg cramps are common as pregnancy goes on. They often happen at night. To prevent them, stretch your calf muscles before bed, stay physically active and drink fluids. Choose low-heeled shoes that give you comfort and support.

    If your leg cramps, stretch the calf muscle on the side of the cramp. A hot shower, warm bath or ice massage also might help.

    Vaginal discharge. You might notice a sticky, clear or white fluid coming from your vagina. This is typical. Contact your healthcare professional if the discharge has a strong smell or an odd color or if you also have pain, soreness or an itch in your vaginal area. This could mean a vaginal infection.

    Urinary tract infections. These infections are common during pregnancy. Contact your healthcare professional if you have a strong urge to urinate that can't wait, sharp pain when you urinate, urine that's cloudy or has a strong smell, or a fever or backache. Without treatment, urinary tract infections can cause a kidney infection.

Leg cramp stretch during pregnancy
Leg cramp stretch during pregnancy

Calf stretches can help prevent and provide relief from leg cramps during pregnancy.
Your Feelings

During the second trimester, you may feel less tired. And you might have more energy. But you also might worry about labor and delivery or about being a parent. To ease worries, learn as much as you can. Make healthy lifestyle choices that can give your baby the best start. Check into childbirth classes. You may find some online.

Find a healthcare professional for your baby. Read about breastfeeding. If you plan to have a job after the baby is born, learn about your employer's parental leave policy. Find out about child care.

Depression and anxiety are common during pregnancy. If you feel depressed or anxious, be sure to seek help if you need it. Ask your healthcare team to refer you to a counselor or psychologist who works with pregnancy issues.
Prenatal care

If you haven't had a COVID-19 vaccine, get vaccinated. COVID-19 vaccines don't cause infection with the COVID-19 virus. Studies show that COVID-19 vaccines don't have serious risks for pregnant people or their babies. During fall and early winter, get a flu vaccine too.

Vaccines can help pregnant people build antibodies that protect their babies. If possible, people who live with you also should be vaccinated against the COVID-19 virus.

During the second trimester of pregnancy, prenatal visits with your healthcare team focus on your baby's growth and finding any health conditions. Your healthcare team checks your weight and blood pressure. A member of the team might measure the size of your uterus by checking the distance from your pubic bone to the top of your uterus. This is the fundal height.

At this stage, you might listen to your baby's heartbeat. Your healthcare team may suggest an ultrasound or other screening tests. You also might learn your baby's sex if you want to.

If you don't have certain high-risk conditions, some of your prenatal visits may be online, also called virtual. If you and your healthcare team plan to have virtual prenatal visits, ask if there are tools you should have at home, such as a blood pressure monitor. To make the most of virtual visits, have a list of questions ready to ask and take detailed notes.

Be sure to mention any symptoms that concern you. Talking with your healthcare team can help put you at ease.
Pregnancy book cover




3rd trimester pregnancy: What to expect
The third trimester of pregnancy can be a challenge for the body and the mind. Here's help easing symptoms — and anxiety — as your due date approaches.
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Feb. 07, 2025

The final 12 weeks of a full-term pregnancy are known as the third trimester of pregnancy. The third trimester can be full of excitement. It also may challenge your body and mind.

The size and position of the unborn baby, also called a fetus, in the uterus might make it hard for you to get comfortable. You may be tired of pregnancy and eager to move on to the next stage. And you might feel let down if you don't give birth by your due date.

Try to stay upbeat as you look forward to the end of your pregnancy and the birth of your baby. Here's what to expect as you wait.
Your body

As your pregnancy progresses, the baby's movements likely will become easier to feel. These movements often happen along with more discomfort and other symptoms, including:

    Braxton Hicks contractions. These slight feelings of tightness in the stomach area vary in strength and length. They often come and go. But they're more likely to happen in the afternoon or evening, after physical activity or after sex. These contractions also tend to happen more often and become stronger as your due date gets closer. Contact your healthcare professional if you have more than six contractions an hour and they steadily get stronger. That might mean you're going into labor.

    Backaches. Pregnancy hormones relax the connective tissue that holds bones in place, especially in the pelvic area. The growing uterus also stretches out muscles in the stomach area. These changes often cause back pain during the third trimester of pregnancy.

    For relief, choose chairs with good back support when you sit. If you need to stand for a while, rest one foot on a box or stool to ease back strain. Abdominal support garments sold in maternity stores also may help. A heating pad or a cold pack may ease sore back muscles too. Be sure to get regular exercise such as walking to keep your back muscles in shape. Wear low-heeled shoes that give you good arch support. Don't wear flat shoes or high heels. Call your healthcare professional if you have serious or ongoing back pain. Physical therapy may help.
    Shortness of breath. Often, this symptom is due to pressure building under the rib cage as a baby grows in the uterus. You also may notice shortness of breath if you lie on your back or recline. You may need to rest on your side instead. The maximum amount of air the lungs can carry also expands. So you may breathe a bit faster and get winded easily. Practice good posture to give your lungs more room to expand.
    Heart palpitations. These bouts of fluttering or pounding in the chest may feel like skipped heartbeats. Most often, you don't need to worry about heart palpitations. They may happen because blood might be slower to return to the heart as the uterus gets bigger. Palpitations usually happen less often later in pregnancy. But tell your healthcare team if you have fluttering or pounding heartbeats. It's especially important to contact your care team if you have palpitations along with chest pain or shortness of breath. With these symptoms, your healthcare professional likely will need to check you in person.

    Heartburn or constipation. Both of these issues can happen during the third trimester. That's because pregnancy hormones slow down digestion, and the growing uterus presses on the intestines.

    Eat small meals often to help prevent heartburn. Try not to lie down right after you eat. Drink water between meals. Don't eat fried foods, citrus fruits, chocolate, and spicy or fried foods. Also stay away from carbonated drinks and foods with lots of tomato. If you're constipated, drink plenty of fluids, and do light physical activity such as walking. Eat fiber-rich foods such as fresh or dried fruit, raw vegetables, and whole-grain cereals. Don't take constipation medicines such as stool softeners or laxatives unless your healthcare professional says that's OK.

    Spider veins, varicose veins and hemorrhoids. Greater blood flow may cause tiny red-purplish veins to appear. These are called spider veins. Their color may look different depending on your skin tone. They may show up on your face, neck and arms. The redness tends to fade after you give birth. Swollen veins called varicose veins also may show up on your legs. Painful, itchy varicose veins in the rectal area, called hemorrhoids, may appear too.

    Exercise and prop up your legs often to ease swelling. You also can use compression socks if needed. Try not to stand for a long time or sit with your legs crossed. And try not to strain while passing stool. Eat more fiber-rich foods, and drink lots of fluids. For hemorrhoid relief, soak in a warm tub to ease hemorrhoid symptoms. Or place witch hazel pads on the affected area. If these steps don't work, talk with your healthcare professional about using hemorrhoid creams.

    Frequent urination. As the baby moves deeper into your pelvis, you'll likely feel more pressure on your bladder. You may urinate more often. This extra pressure also may cause you to leak urine — especially when you laugh, cough, sneeze, bend or lift.

    It may help to take bathroom breaks often and to do exercises called Kegels that strengthen the muscles that control urination. You also may want to use panty liners to absorb leaked urine. If you think you may be leaking the clear liquid that surrounds your baby in the uterus, contact your healthcare professional. This liquid is called amniotic fluid. Also contact your healthcare professional if you feel burning along with frequent urination. This can be a symptom of an infection.

Your emotions

The third trimester can be stressful. You may have fears about giving birth or becoming a parent. And there's lots to do to get ready for your baby. To ease stress, try to find some time to relax. Ideas that may help include:

    Note your thoughts in a journal.
    Play music you enjoy and talk soothingly to your unborn baby.
    Take pregnancy photos to show your child later in life.

You also can ease stress and gain a sense of control by making some key choices, such as:

    Will you take your baby to a pediatrician or a family doctor for healthcare checkups?
    Will you breastfeed or use baby formula?
    If your baby is born male, will you get your baby circumcised? That's a procedure to remove the skin that covers the tip of the penis, also called the foreskin.

Fears about childbirth may become more frequent during the third trimester of pregnancy. How much will it hurt? How long will it last? How will I cope? If you haven't done so already, think about taking childbirth classes. You learn what to expect in these classes. You also meet others who share your excitement and concerns. Talk with others who've had positive birth experiences. And ask your healthcare professional about the choices for pain relief during labor and delivery.

The reality of parenthood may start to sink in as well. You might feel anxious, especially if this is your first baby.

Talk with your healthcare professional if you have lots of anxiety or if you have more anxious feelings than upbeat ones. Your healthcare professional may suggest talk therapy or medicine to help you manage your anxiety.
Prenatal care

During the third trimester, your healthcare professional may ask you to come in more often for checkups.

During those checkups, your healthcare professional checks your weight and blood pressure and asks about any symptoms you're having. If you don't have certain high-risk conditions, some of your checkups may be online. Online checkups also are known as telehealth visits or virtual visits. If you and your healthcare professional choose to have online visits, ask if there are tools you should have at home, such as a blood pressure monitor. To make the most of online visits, write a list of questions ahead of time and take detailed notes.

If you haven't yet received a COVID-19 vaccine, get vaccinated. COVID-19 vaccines don't cause infection with the COVID-19 virus. The vaccines are safe and effective for pregnant people and their babies. The vaccines don't pose any serious risks for pregnant people or their babies. Vaccination can help pregnant people build proteins called antibodies that protect their babies. If possible, people who live with you also should get vaccinated against COVID-19.

Get one dose of tetanus, diphtheria and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine during each pregnancy. It's ideal to get the Tdap vaccine during the third trimester, between weeks 27 and 36 of pregnancy. This can help protect your baby from whooping cough before your baby can be vaccinated. This vaccine is recommended in every pregnancy, even if you are up to date on the vaccination from before your pregnancy.

Talk with your healthcare professional about getting vaccinated against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection. RSV causes infections of the lungs and other organs needed for breathing. RSV infection can be life-threatening for babies. Getting the RSV vaccine during pregnancy can help protect you and your baby. In the United States, you can get vaccinated once between 32 weeks through 36 weeks of pregnancy during September through January.

You'll also need screening tests for various health conditions, including:

    Gestational diabetes. This is a type of diabetes that can happen during pregnancy. Prompt treatment and healthy lifestyle choices can help you manage your blood sugar and deliver a healthy baby.
    Iron deficiency anemia. This condition means you have too few healthy red blood cells to carry enough oxygen to your body's tissues. Iron deficiency anemia can cause you to feel very tired. Treatment may involve taking iron supplements.
    Group B strep. This type of bacteria can live in the vagina or rectum. Pregnant people don't get symptoms from it. But it can cause a serious infection for your baby if your baby is exposed to the bacteria during birth. If tests show that you have group B strep, your healthcare professional gives you antibiotics while you're in labor. This medicine lowers the risk of your baby being exposed to the bacteria.

Your healthcare professional also checks the baby's size and heart rate. Near the end of your pregnancy, your healthcare professional checks the baby's position and asks about the baby's movements. Your healthcare professional also may ask about your preferences regarding labor and pain management as you get ready for delivery.

If you have specific wishes for labor and birth, put your wishes in a birth plan. For example, if you want to labor in a tub of water or if you don't want to take pain medicine, note that in your plan. Review the plan with your healthcare professional. But keep in mind that health concerns during pregnancy could cause plans to change.

As your due date gets closer, keep asking questions. Knowing what to expect can help you have a better experience when you give birth.
Pregnancy book cover












Is it safe to fly during pregnancy?

Generally, air travel before 36 weeks of pregnancy is considered safe for people who aren't dealing with any pregnancy problems. Still, if you're pregnant, it's a good idea to talk with your health care provider before you fly.

Your provider might suggest that you not fly if you have certain pregnancy complications that could get worse because of air travel or that could require emergency care. Examples include a history of miscarriage or vaginal bleeding, severe anemia, and high blood pressure or diabetes that's not well controlled. If you had preeclampsia during a previous pregnancy — a condition that causes high blood pressure and extra protein in urine — flying may not be advised. The same is true if you're pregnant with twins or other multiples.

Tell your provider how far you are flying, as the length of the flight might make a difference. Also, be aware that some airlines may not allow pregnant people on international flights. Check with your airline before you make travel arrangements.

After 36 weeks of pregnancy, your health care provider may advise against flying. And some airlines don't allow pregnant people to fly after 36 weeks. The airline also may require a letter from your health care provider that states how far along in your pregnancy you are and whether flying is advised.

If your health care provider says it's okay for you to fly, and your plans are flexible, the best time to travel by air might be during the second trimester. The risks of common pregnancy emergencies are lowest during that time.

When you fly:

    Buckle up. During the trip, keep your seatbelt fastened when you are seated, and secure it under your belly.
    Drink plenty of fluids. Low humidity in the airplane could cause you to become dehydrated.
    Avoid gassy foods and drinks before you fly. Gases expand during flight, and that could make you uncomfortable. Examples of foods and drinks to avoid include broccoli and carbonated soda.
    Think about medical care. Plan for how you'll get obstetric care during your trip if you need it. Bring copies of your medical information in case you need care while you're away.

Blood clots

Air travel can raise the risk for blood clots in the legs, a condition called venous thrombosis. The risk is higher for pregnant people. Moving your legs may help prevent this problem. Take a walk up and down the aisle every hour during the flight. If you must remain seated, flex and extend your ankles from time to time. In general, it's best to avoid tightfitting clothing, as that can hinder blood flow. Wearing compression stockings can help with blood circulation during a long flight.
Radiation

Radiation exposure linked to air travel at high altitudes isn't thought to be a problem for most people who fly during pregnancy. But pilots, flight attendants and others who fly often might be exposed to a level of radiation that raises concerns during pregnancy. If you must fly frequently during your pregnancy, talk about it with your health care provider.
  












  Is it safe to take Claritin or other allergy medicines during pregnancy?

Sometimes, health care professionals recommend certain allergy medicines during pregnancy. But before you take an allergy medicine, try to ease your symptoms with the following tips:

    Stay away from your triggers. Try not to come in contact with anything that sets off your allergy symptoms.
    Use saline nasal spray. Saline is a mix of salt and water. You can buy it in spray form at a drug store. Use the spray as needed to ease your symptoms.

    Try nasal irrigation. Once a day or as needed, fill a neti pot with a saline nasal solution or specially prepared water. Tilt your head sideways over a sink. Then place the spout of the neti pot in your upper nostril. Pour in the liquid so it drains through your lower nostril. Breathe through your mouth as you pour. Repeat on the other side.

    Do not use regular tap water. Water should be distilled or sterile, previously boiled and cooled, or passed through a filter that is designed to trap common germs.
    Get active. Exercise helps ease swelling inside the nose.
    Use nasal strips. These flexible strips go across the bridge of the nose. They can help keep your nasal passages open when you have a stuffy nose.
    Raise the head of your bed. Elevate it by about 30 to 45 degrees. If you don't have an adjustable bed, try placing objects such as bricks under the legs of your bed. This might help ease your symptoms.

If you still want to try allergy medicine, talk with a member of your health care team. Ask about the risks and benefits. To manage mild allergy symptoms, your health care professional might recommend an oral antihistamine that's taken by mouth. These antihistamines include loratadine (Claritin, Alavert) and cetirizine (Zyrtec Allergy).

For moderate to serious symptoms, your health care professional might recommend a steroid spray along with an antihistamine. Take the lowest effective dose of the steroid spray. Choices that you can buy without a prescription include the nasal sprays budesonide (Rhinocort Allergy), fluticasone (Flonase Allergy Relief), and mometasone (Nasonex 24HR Allergy).

Your health care professional also might recommend certain decongestants to treat a stuffy nose. The nasal spray oxymetazoline can be used for up to three days in a row. Talk with a member of your health care team if your symptoms don't get better within three days. Longer use can cause congestion to become worse.

During your second and third trimesters of pregnancy, if you don't have high blood pressure, your care team may recommend a decongestant taken by mouth called pseudoephedrine (Sudafed, SudoGest). You'll likely be told to take 30 to 60 milligrams (mg) every 4 to 6 hours as needed. Do not take more than 240 mg every 24 hours. Be sure to talk with your care team before you try pseudoephedrine. Using it during the first trimester may be linked with a risk of serious birth defects.

    Air travel during pregnancy




    Pregnancy care
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook X Pinterest

Getting good care before, during, and after your pregnancy is very important. It can help your baby grow and develop and keep you both healthy. It is the best way to be sure your little one gets a head start on a healthy life.

PRENATAL CARE

Good prenatal care includes good nutrition and health habits before and during pregnancy. Ideally, you should talk with your health care provider before you start trying to become pregnant. Here are some things you will need to do:

Choose a provider: You will want to choose a provider for your pregnancy and childbirth. This provider will provide prenatal care, delivery, and postpartum services.

Take folic acid: If you are considering becoming pregnant, or are pregnant, you should take a supplement with at least 600 micrograms (0.6 mg) of folic acid every day. Taking folic acid will decrease the risk for certain birth defects. Prenatal vitamins almost always contain more than 600 micrograms (0.6 mg) of folic acid per capsule or tablet.

You should also:

    Talk with your provider about any medicines you take. This includes over-the-counter medicines. You should only take medicines your provider says are safe to take while you are pregnant.
    Avoid all alcohol and recreational drug use and limit caffeine.
    Quit smoking, if you smoke. 

Go for prenatal visits and tests: You will see your provider many times during your pregnancy for prenatal care. The number of visits and types of exams you receive will change, depending on where you are in your pregnancy:

    First trimester care
    Second trimester care
    Third trimester care

Talk with your provider about the different tests you may receive during your pregnancy. These tests can help your provider see how your baby is developing and if there are any problems with your pregnancy. These tests may include:

    Ultrasound tests to see how your baby is growing and help establish a due date
    Blood glucose tests to check for gestational diabetes
    Blood test to check for normal fetal DNA in your blood
    Fetal echocardiography to check the baby's heart
    Amniocentesis to check for birth defects and genetic problems
    Nuchal translucency test (vaginal ultrasound) to check for problems with the baby's genes
    Tests to check for sexually transmitted diseases (such as syphilis, hepatitis B, and HIV) or other infections
    Blood type testing such as Rh and ABO
    Blood tests for anemia
    Blood tests to follow any chronic illness you had before becoming pregnant

Depending on your family history, you may choose to screen for genetic problems. There are many things to think about before doing genetic testing. Your provider can help you decide if this is right for you.

If you have a high-risk pregnancy, you may need to see your provider more often and have additional tests.

WHAT TO EXPECT DURING PREGNANCY

Your provider will talk with you about how to manage common pregnancy symptoms such as:

    Morning sickness
    Backaches, leg pain, and other aches and pains during pregnancy
    Problems sleeping
    Skin and hair changes
    Vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy

Your provider will discuss immunizations and vaccines that are important during pregnancy. There are many safe vaccines that can benefit both you and your baby. Talk with your provider to get more up to date information on vaccines.

No two pregnancies are the same. Some women have few or mild symptoms during pregnancy. Many women work their full term and travel while they are pregnant. Others may have to cut back on their hours or stop working. Some women require bed rest for a few days or possibly weeks to continue with a healthy pregnancy.

POSSIBLE PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS

Pregnancy is a complex process. While many women have normal pregnancies, complications can occur. However, having a complication does not mean you will not have a healthy baby. It means your provider will monitor you closely and take special care of you and your baby during the remainder of your term.

Common complications include:

    Diabetes during pregnancy (gestational diabetes).
    High blood pressure during pregnancy (preeclampsia). Your provider will talk with you about how to care for yourself if you have preeclampsia.
    Premature or preterm changes in the cervix.
    Problems with the placenta. It may cover the cervix, pull away from the womb, or not work as well as it should.
    Vaginal bleeding.
    Early labor.
    Your baby is not growing well.
    Your baby has medical problems. 

It can be scary to think about possible problems. But it is important to be aware so you can tell your provider if you notice unusual symptoms.

LABOR AND DELIVERY

Talk with your provider about what to expect during labor and delivery. You can make your wishes known by creating a birth plan. Talk with your provider about what to include in your birth plan. You may want to include things like:

    How you want to manage pain during labor, including whether to have an epidural block
    How you feel about episiotomy
    What would happen if you need a C-section
    How you feel about forceps delivery or vacuum-assisted delivery
    Who you want with you during delivery 

It is also a good idea to make a list of things to bring to the hospital. Pack a bag ahead of time so you have it ready to go when you go into labor.

As you get close to your due date, you will notice certain changes. It is not always easy to tell when you will go into labor. Your provider can tell you when it is time to come in for an exam or go to the hospital for delivery.

Talk with your provider about what happens if you pass your due date. Depending on your age and risk factors, your provider may need to induce labor around 39 to 42 weeks.

Once labor begins, you can use a number of strategies to get through labor.

WHAT TO EXPECT AFTER YOUR CHILD IS BORN

Having a baby is an exciting and wonderful event. It is also hard work for the mother. You will need to take care of yourself in the first few weeks after delivery. The type of care you will need depends on how you delivered your baby.

If you had a vaginal delivery, you will likely spend 1 to 2 days in the hospital before you go home.

If you had a C-section, you will likely stay in the hospital for 2 to 3 days before going home. Your provider will explain how to care for yourself at home as you heal.

If you are able to breastfeed, there are many benefits to breastfeeding. It can also help you lose your pregnancy weight.

Be patient with yourself as you learn to breastfeed. It can take 2 to 3 weeks to learn the skill of nursing your baby. There is a lot to learn, such as:

    How to care for your breasts
    Positioning your baby for breastfeeding
    How to overcome any breastfeeding problems
    Breast milk pumping and storage
    Breastfeeding skin and nipple changes
    Timing of breastfeeding

Your mood may also be different following the delivery. Being a new mother can put stress on both your body and mind. About 2-3 days after childbirth, some women begin to feel depressed, anxious, and upset. They may feel angry with the new baby, their partners, or other children. They may also cry for no reason and have difficulty sleeping, eating, and making choices. They may question whether they can manage caring for a baby. These feelings, often called the baby blues, may come and go in the first few days after childbirth. Baby blues usually get better within 1-2 weeks without any treatment.

Postpartum depression is a type of depression that causes intense feelings of sadness, anxiety, or anger that keep people from being able to do their daily tasks or form normal relationships with their families. It can start about a month after childbirth, or even up to a year after having a baby. Contact your provider right away if you think you may have postpartum depression.

If you need help, there are many resources for new mothers.

WHEN TO CALL YOUR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER

Contact your provider if you are pregnant or think you are pregnant and:

    You take medicines for diabetes, thyroid disease, seizures, depression, or high blood pressure or any other medical condition
    You are not getting prenatal care
    You cannot manage common pregnancy symptoms without medicines
    You might have been exposed to a sexually transmitted infection, chemicals, radiation, or unusual pollutants 

Contact your provider immediately if you are pregnant and you:

    Have a fever, chills, or painful urination
    Vaginal bleeding
    Severe belly pain
    Physical or severe emotional trauma
    Have your water break (membranes rupture)
    Are in the last half of your pregnancy and notice the baby is moving less or not at all 

References

Greenberg JM, Narendran V, Brady JM, Nathan AT, Haberman BB. Neonatal morbidities of prenatal and perinatal origin. In: Lockwood CJ, Copel JA, Dugoff L, et al, eds. Creasy and Resnik's Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2023:chap 73.

Gregory KD, Ramos DE, Steegers-Theunissen RPM. Preconception and prenatal care. In: Landon MB, Galan HL, Jauniaux ERM, et al, eds. Gabbe's Obstetrics: Normal and Problem Pregnancies. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2025:chap 5.

Kumar G. Early pregnancy care. In: Layden EA, Thomson A, Owen P, Madhra M, Magowan BA, eds. Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Limited; 2023:chap 6.
Review Date 2/3/2025





What causes ankle swelling during pregnancy — and what can I do about it?

A number of factors can lead to swelling in the ankles during pregnancy. For example, your body keeps in more fluid during pregnancy. And your growing uterus puts pressure on your veins, which can slow the return of blood to your heart. Changes in hormones also play a role.

Foot and ankle swelling during pregnancy is common. It usually goes away within a few weeks after the baby is born. In the meantime, it might help to:

    Stay off your feet. Don't stand for a long time. When you can, lie down with your legs raised. Or sit with your feet up. When you're seated, move your feet around in a circular motion at the ankles. Gently flex your feet to stretch your calf muscles.
    Sleep on your left side. This takes pressure off the large vein that returns blood from the lower half of your body to your heart. That vein is called the inferior vena cava. Raising your legs slightly with pillows while you sleep also may help.
    Wear compression stockings. Your healthcare professional might suggest that you wear supportive tights or stockings during the day.
    Stand or walk in a pool. Standing or walking in a pool seems to help compress tissues in the legs. That may give you some relief from swelling during pregnancy.
    Wear clothes without tight bands. Tight bands on clothes, such as at the ankles or top of the calves, may make it harder for your blood to flow easily.

Keep in mind that having ankle swelling doesn't mean you should cut back on how much you drink. A typical recommendation for fluids during pregnancy is about 10 cups (2.3 liters) each day.

Mild foot and ankle swelling during pregnancy isn't cause for worry. But sudden swelling that's painful — especially if it's in one leg only — could mean you have a blood clot. The medical term for that condition is deep vein thrombosis (DVT). If swelling quickly gets worse, your blood pressure may be higher than it should be. The same is true if you have sudden swelling in your face or hands Blood pressure outside the typical range during pregnancy may be caused by medical conditions such as gestational diabetes or pre-eclampsia.

If you see a sudden increase in swelling, contact a member of your healthcare team right away.










YO U R G U I D E T O
Healthy Pregnancy
1 2 t h e d i t i o n
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |2
Your Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy
Dear Parents-to-Be,
Thank you for choosing Cleveland Clinic for your
obstetrics care and allowing us to help bring
your new little one(s) into the world! This is an
exciting time for you, and we are here to assist in
making your experience the best it can be.
Deciding to become a parent is one of the most
important decisions you will make in your life.
As babies don’t come with instruction manuals,
you rely on healthcare professionals for education
and guidance. Our goal is to provide you with the
best possible information to make knowledgeable
decisions.
Our highly trained obstetricians, maternal-
fetal medicine specialists, and certified nurse
midwives deliver more than 13,000 babies a
year at three hospital locations. We are excited
to be a part of your team and hope that you will
continue to rely on us for all your healthcare
needs. For more information about our physicians
and services, go to clevelandclinic.org/obstetrics.
For birthing patients who have experienced
previous sexual violence or other trauma,
Cleveland Clinic has developed its M-Power
Program to provide trauma-informed care that
puts your needs first. This compassionate,
holistic approach ensures that you feel prepared
for labor, delivery and the postpartum period.
Cleveland Clinic has partnered with the Ohio
Department of Health to promote safe sleep,
while proactively working to reduce the infant
mortality rate. This includes the ABCs of safe
sleep. Always place your baby alone on their
back in their crib with only a firm mattress and a
fitted sheet.
How you will feed your baby is a choice that
all parents must face. Cleveland Clinic birthing
hospitals support exclusive breast milk feeding
for the first six months of life and are taking
special steps to create the best possible
environment for successful breastfeeding. We
strive to renew our Baby Friendly Hospital
designation every five years. The Baby Friendly
Hospital Initiative (www.babyfriendlyusa.org) is
an international program of the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
Breastfeeding offers an unmatched beginning for
babies and is recommended by the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) as the primary
source of nutrition for the first year of life.
Scientific studies have shown that breastfed
babies are healthier, have reduced risk of sudden
infant death syndrome (SIDS), and have fewer
cases of childhood cancers and diabetes.
In addition to breastfeeding and birthing
assistance, Cleveland Clinic can help you prepare
for the big day through classes like “Baby
Basics” and “Boot Camp for New Dads.” We
also offer lactation consultations, informative
materials and support groups. Cleveland Clinic
pediatricians and family medicine specialists
offer assistance in well-baby care at our nearby
family health center and hospitals. You can see
a schedule of the many prenatal classes we
offer at clevelandclinic.org/childbirthed. This
book can be accessed at clevelandclinic.org/
healthypregnancyguide.
For more information about making an informed
decision about your baby’s nutrition, we
encourage you to speak to your healthcare
provider.
Sincerely,
Your Women’s Health Team
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |3
1. Mother Care | 7
› Prenatal care
› Prenatal vitamins
› Medicine guidelines during pregnancy
› Good nutrition during pregnancy
› Dental care during pregnancy
› Global obstetrical care
› HIV testing
› Vaccination during pregnancy
› Sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy
› How smoking affects you and your baby
› High blood pressure
› Gestational diabetes
› Toxoplasmosis and pregnancy
› Coping with the physical changes
of pregnancy
› Finding a comfortable position
› Exercise during pregnancy
› Pregnancy childbirth and bladder control
› Sex during pregnancy
› Sleep during pregnancy
› Travel during pregnancy
› Depression during pregnancy
CONTENTS
2. First Trimester | 66
› Your first trimester of pregnancy
› When to call your provider
› Prenatal ultrasonography
› Ultrasound appointment guidelines
› Screening for chromosome abnormalities
› CPT codes for genetic tests
3. Second Trimester | 76
› Your second trimester of pregnancy
› Welcome to the second trimester
› When to call your provider
› Oral glucose challenge test
4. Third Trimester | 80
› Your third trimester of pregnancy
› When to call your provider during the
third trimester
› Counting your baby kicks
› Non-stress test
› Group B streptococcus and pregnancy
› True vs. false labor
› Premature labor
› What to pack for the hospital
› Your birth day
› Types of delivery
› Pain relief options during childbirth
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |4
5. After Delivery | 104
› What to expect after delivery
› Physical changes after delivery
› Vaginal tears
› Long-acting reversible contraception
› Depression after the birth of a child
› Exercise after delivery
6. Breastfeeding | 118
› The benefits of breastfeeding
› 24-hour rooming-in
› Skin-to-skin contact for you and your baby
› Breastfeeding the first weeks
› Over-the-counter medications and
breastfeeding
› Contraception during breastfeeding
7. Baby Care | 136
› Safe sleep
› Newborn care in hospital
› Newborn appearance
› Newborn behavior
› When to call the doctor
› Umbilical cord appearance and care
› Circumcision
› Childhood immunizations
› Adding your baby to your insurance policy
› Are you looking for a pediatrician?
› Choosing a car seat
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |5Return to Table of Contents
TYPES OF REMEDY SAFE MEDICATIONS TO TAKE DURING PREGNANCY
Allergy Diphenhydramine (Benadryl®)
Loratidine (Claritin®)
Cetirizine (Zyrtec®)
Cold and flu Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)*
Dextromethorphan (Robitussin®)*
Guaifenesin (Mucinex® [plain])*
Vicks Vapor Rub® mentholated cream
Mentholated or non-mentholated cough drops
(Sugar-free cough drops for gestational diabetes should not
contain blends of herbs or aspartame) pseudoephedrine
([Sudafed®] after 1st trimester) acetaminophen (Tylenol®)*
Saline nasal drops or spray
Warm salt water gargle
*Note: Do not take the “SA” (sustained action) form of these
drugs or the “multi-symptom” form of these drugs.
Do not use Nyquil®, or a generic version, due to its high
alcohol content.
Diarrhea Loperamide ([Imodium®] after 1st trimester, for 24 hours only)
Constipation Methylcellulose fiber (Citrucel®)
Docusate (Colace®)
Psyllium (Fiberall®, Metamucil®)
Polycarbophil (FiberCon®)
Polyethylene glycol (MiraLAX®)*
*Occasional use only
First aid ointment Bacitracin
Neomycin/polymyxin B/bacitracin (Neosporin®)
Headache Acetaminophen (Tylenol)
Heartburn Aluminum hydroxide/magnesium carbonate (Gaviscon®)*
Famotidine (Pepcid AC®)
Aluminum hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide (Maalox®)
Calcium carbonate/magnesium carbonate (Mylanta®)
Calcium carbonate (Titralac®, Tums®)
*Occasional use only
Hemorrhoids Phenylephrine/mineral oil/petrolatum (Preparation H®)
Witch hazel (Tucks® pads or ointment)
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |6Return to Table of Contents
TYPES OF REMEDY SAFE MEDICATIONS TO TAKE DURING PREGNANCY
Insect repellant N,N-diethyl-meta-toluamide (DEET®)
Nausea and vomiting Doxylamine (Unisom Sleeptab)
Vitamin B6 25mg three times per day in combination with
doxylamine 12.5mg at bedtime to prevent nausea.
Ginger extract 125-250mg every six hours.
Rashes Diphenhydramine cream (Benadryl)
Hydrocortisone cream or ointment
Oatmeal bath (Aveeno®)
Sleep Diphenhydramine (Unisom SleepGels®, Benadryl)
Yeast infection Miconazole (Monistat® 7-Day)
*Please note: No drug can be considered 100% safe to use during pregnancy.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |7Return to Table of Contents
› Prenatal care
› Prenatal vitamins
› Medicine guidelines during pregnancy
› Good nutrition during pregnancy
› Dental care during pregnancy
› Global obstetrical care
› HIV testing
› Vaccination during pregnancy
› Sexually transmitted diseases and pregnancy
› How smoking affects you and your baby
› High blood pressure
› Gestational diabetes
› Toxoplasmosis and pregnancy
› Coping with the physical changes
of pregnancy
› Finding a comfortable position
› Exercise during pregnancy
› Pregnancy childbirth and bladder control
› Sex during pregnancy
› Sleep during pregnancy
› Travel during pregnancy
› Depression during pregnancy
1. Mother Care
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |8Return to Table of Contents
Prenatal Care: Your First Visit
Why is prenatal care important?
Regular appointments with your healthcare
provider throughout your pregnancy are
important to ensure the health of you and your
baby. In addition to medical care, prenatal
care includes education on pregnancy and
childbirth, plus counseling and support.
Frequent visits with your healthcare provider
allow you to follow the progress of your
baby’s development. Visits also give you the
opportunity to ask questions. Most healthcare
providers welcome your partner at each visit,
as well as interested family members.
What happens on my first medical visit?
The first visit is designed to determine your
general health and give your healthcare
provider clues to the risk factors that might
affect your pregnancy. It will typically be longer
than future visits. The purpose of the initial
visit is to:
• Determine your due date.
• Find out your health history.
• Explore the medical history of
family members.
• Determine if you have any pregnancy risk
factors based on your age, health, and/or
personal and family history.
You will be asked about previous pregnancies
and surgeries, medical conditions, and
exposure to any contagious diseases. Also,
notify your healthcare provider about any
medications (prescription or over-the-counter)
you have taken or are currently taking.
We ask some very personal questions, but
be assured that any information you give is
strictly confidential.
Physical exam
A thorough physical exam is also part of the
first visit. You are weighed, and your blood
pressure, heart, lungs and breasts are checked.
The first visit also includes a pelvic exam by
your healthcare provider.
Pelvic exam
During the pelvic exam, a bimanual internal
exam (with two fingers inside the vagina and
one hand on the abdomen) will be performed
to determine the size of your uterus and pelvis.
Your healthcare provider might listen for the
baby’s heartbeat with a special instrument
called a doppler, which uses ultrasound (high
frequency sound waves). A doppler usually
cannot detect a baby’s heartbeat before the
10th to 12th week of pregnancy.
Lab tests
Many lab tests are ordered in your first
trimester, including:
• Complete blood count (CBC) screens for
blood problems, such as anemia (low iron).
• Hepatitis C.
• RPR screens for syphilis (a sexually
transmitted disease).
• Rubella: Tests for immunity (protection)
against German measles.
• HBSAG: Tests for hepatitis B (a liver
infection).
• Urinalysis: Tests for kidney infection and
bladder infection.
• HIV: Screens for antibodies in your blood.
• Cystic Fibrosis: Screens for the presence of
the CF gene.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |9Return to Table of Contents
• Type and screen: Determines your blood
type and Rh factor (an antigen or protein
on the surface of blood cells that causes an
immune system response).
• Sickle cell screen.
• Gonorrhea and chlamydia testing.
• SMA: Screens for a gene mutation that
causes spinal muscular atrophy.
How is my expected date of delivery
determined?
Normally, your due date is 280 days (40
weeks or about 10 months) from the first day
of your last period. However, if your periods are
not regular or are not 28 days in cycle, your
due date might be different from the “280-day
rule.” Your healthcare provider might order an
ultrasound to determine your due date.
A full-term pregnancy lasts 37 to 42 weeks,
so your actual date of delivery can be different
from your estimated date of delivery (EDD
or EDC). A very small number of babies are
actually born on their due dates.
How often should I see my healthcare
provider during pregnancy?
The schedule of your prenatal care visits
will depend on any special circumstances
or risk factors you might have. Generally,
it is recommended to have follow-up visits
as follows:
• Every four weeks until 28 weeks.
• Every two to three weeks from 28 to
36 weeks.
• Weekly from 36 weeks until delivery.
During these visits, be sure to ask questions. It
might help to bring a list of questions with you.
What is monitored at subsequent visits?
During prenatal care visits, your weight and
blood pressure will be checked, and a urine
sample will be tested for sugar and protein.
Your uterus will be measured to follow the
growth of the fetus. The fetus’ heartbeat will
also be checked (usually beginning in the 10th
to 12th week of pregnancy).
Additional tests might be required, depending
on your individual condition or special needs.
During the last month, your office visits will
include discussions about labor and delivery.
Your office visits may include an internal
examination to check your cervix (the lower
end of your uterus) for thinning (called
effacement) and opening (called dilation).
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |10Return to Table of Contents
Prenatal Vitamins
What are prenatal vitamins?
Prenatal vitamins are specially formulated
multivitamins that mothers-to-be are advised
to take for their own health as well as for
the health of their babies. These vitamins
make up for any nutritional deficiencies in
your diet during your pregnancy. While the
supplements contain numerous vitamins and
minerals, folic acid, iron and calcium content
are especially important. The American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG)
recommends pregnant and lactating women
should aim for an average daily intake of at
least 200 mg docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)
a day in addition to their prenatal vitamins.
Prenatal vitamins, as well as DHA, can be
purchased over-the-counter or with
a prescription.
Why do pregnant women need high levels
of folic acid, iron and calcium?
Taking folic acid can reduce your risk of
having a baby with a serious birth defect of
the brain and spinal cord, called the neural
tube. A baby with spina bifida, the most
common neural tube defect, is born with a
spine that is not completely developed. The
exposed nerves are damaged, leaving the child
with varying degrees of paralysis, incontinence,
and sometimes mental retardation. Some
women are at an increased risk for having a
baby with an open neural tube defect. These
women include, but are not limited to, those
with a family history of spina bifida and
those taking anti-epileptic medicines. ACOG
recommends additional folic acid for women
at an increased risk for having a baby with a
neural tube defect. Your doctor can discuss
this with you and, in some cases, refer you for
genetic counseling.
Neural tube defects develop in the first 28
days after conception. Because about half of
all pregnancies are unplanned, the U.S. Public
Health Service recommends that all women
of childbearing age get 400 micrograms of
folic acid each day. There are natural sources
of folic acid: green leafy vegetables, nuts,
beans and citrus fruits. It is also found in
many fortified breakfast cereals and some
vitamin supplements.
Taking calcium during pregnancy can prevent a
new mother from losing her own bone density
as the fetus uses the mineral for bone growth.
Taking iron helps both the mother and baby’s
blood carry oxygen.
While a daily vitamin supplement is no
substitute for a healthy diet, most pregnant
and lactating women need supplements
to make sure they get adequate levels of
these minerals.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |11Return to Table of Contents
Medicine Guidelines During Pregnancy
Although some medicines are considered
safe during pregnancy, the effects of other
medicines on your unborn baby are unknown.
Certain medicines can be most harmful to a
developing baby when taken during the first
three months of pregnancy, often before a
woman even knows she is pregnant.
Illegal Drugs/Alcohol
Street drugs are not good for your health, but
they are even worse for your unborn baby’s
health, since drugs are passed to your baby
while you are pregnant. Illegal drugs such
as angel dust, cocaine, crack, heroin, LSD,
marijuana and speed increase the chance
that your baby is born with many possible
problems. When a pregnant woman drinks
alcohol or uses drugs during her pregnancy,
so does her baby. These substances can pass
through the placenta and to the baby through
the umbilical cord. Alcohol, tobacco and drugs
can lead to premature birth, birth defects, low
birth weight, placental abruption, fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders, miscarriage, stillbirth and
developmental/behavior problems. According
to the March of Dimes, there is no amount of
alcohol or marijuana that is proven to be safe
during pregnancy. You may know some women
who drank regularly during pregnancy and
had seemingly healthy babies. You may know
some women who had very little alcohol during
pregnancy and had babies with serious health
conditions. Every pregnancy is different and
drinking alcohol may hurt one baby more than
another. Due to their small liver, babies cannot
break down the alcohol as well as you can.
Heroin is a street drug made from poppy plant
seeds and is usually injected with a needle,
but it can be smoked or snorted. Using heroin
during pregnancy can be dangerous, but don’t
stop taking it without getting treatment from
your healthcare provider first.
Quitting suddenly can cause severe problems.
There are drugs that help you gradually reduce
your dependence on heroin such as methadone
or buprenorphine.
Let your healthcare provider (e.g. physician,
pharmacist) know if you have ever used illegal
drugs or if you have an addiction to any drugs
so he or she can minimize the risk to your
baby. They are there to offer treatment and
support. You may also call 1.800.662.4357
(National Drug and Alcohol Treatment Referral
Service) for more information.
Prescription medicine guidelines
If you were taking prescription medicines
before you became pregnant, please ask your
healthcare provider about the safety of
continuing these medicines as soon as you find
out that you are pregnant.
Your healthcare provider will weigh the benefit
to you and the risk to your baby when making
recommendations about a particular medicine.
With some medicines, the risk of not taking
them might be more serious than the potential
risk associated with taking them.
For example, if you have a urinary tract
infection (UTI), your healthcare provider might
prescribe an antibiotic. If the urinary tract
infection is not treated, it could cause long-
term problems for both the mother and her
baby. If you are prescribed any new medicine,
please inform your healthcare provider that you
are pregnant. Be sure to discuss the risks and
benefits of the newly prescribed medicine with
your healthcare provider.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |12Return to Table of Contents
Good Nutrition During Pregnancy for You and Your Baby
You are now eating for you and your baby.
While there are two of you now, you only need
to increase your calorie intake by 200 to 300
calories. This guide will help you choose a
variety of healthy foods for you and your baby
to get all the nutrients you need.
What foods should I eat?
You will need an additional 200 to 300 extra
calories from nutrient-dense foods such as
lean meats, low fat dairy, fruits, vegetables
and whole grain products. It will be important
to carefully consider the foods you consume
during your pregnancy. This is a time to eat
more foods that are nutrient- dense, and fewer
sweets and treats. Eat a variety of foods. Use
the website www.choosemyplate.gov as a
guide to choose the amounts of foods in each
food group.
Daily guidelines for eating healthy during
pregnancy
• Calcium: The body needs calcium to build
strong bones and teeth. Calcium also allows
the blood to clot normally, nerves to function
properly, and the heart to beat normally.
The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends
1,000 milligrams per day for pregnant and
lactating (breastfeeding) women. Women
19 years or younger need 1,300 milligrams
a day. Eat or drink four servings of dairy
products or foods rich in calcium. Dairy
products are the best source of calcium.
Other sources of calcium are dark, leafy
greens, fortified cereal, breads, fish, fortified
orange juices, almonds, and sesame seeds.
• Folic acid: Folic acid is used to make the
extra blood your body needs during
pregnancy. ACOG and the March of Dimes
recommend 400 micrograms per day for
pregnant women. This amount is included in
your prenatal vitamins. The March of Dimes
suggest that 70 percent of all neural tube
defects can be avoided with appropriate
folic acid intake. Some women are at an
increased risk for having a baby with an
open neural tube defect (including, but not
limited to, women with a family history
of spina bifida, women on anti-epileptic
medication, etc.) ACOG recommends
additional folic acid for women at an
increased risk for neural tube defect.
Your doctor can discuss this with you and,
in some instances, refer you for genetic
counseling to discuss further. Foods rich
in folic acid include lentils, kidney beans,
green leafy vegetables (spinach, romaine
lettuce, kale and broccoli), citrus fruits,
nuts and beans. Folic acid is also added
as a supplement to certain foods such
as fortified breads, cereal, pasta, rice
and flours.
• Iron: Iron is an important part of red blood
cells, which carry oxygen through the
body. Iron will help you build resistance
to stress and disease, as well as help you
avoid tiredness, weakness, irritability and
depression. ACOG recommends you receive
27 total milligrams of iron a day between
food and your prenatal vitamin. Good
sources include whole grain products,
lean beef and pork, dried fruit and beans,
sardines, and green leafy vegetables.
• Vitamin A: ACOG recommends you receive
770 micrograms of vitamin A daily. Foods
rich in vitamin A are leafy green vegetables,
deep yellow or orange vegetables such as
carrots or sweet potatoes, milk and liver.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |13Return to Table of Contents
• Daily recommendations: Include two to
three servings of vegetables, two servings
of fruits, at least three servings of whole
grain bread, cereals, pasta, and two to three
servings of lean protein (e.g. meat, fish and
poultry).
• Vitamin D: Vitamin D works with calcium
to help the baby’s bones and teeth develop.
It also is essential for healthy skin and
eyesight. All women, including those
who are pregnant, need 600 international
units of vitamin D a day. Good sources
are milk fortified with vitamin D and fatty
fish such as salmon. Exposure to sunlight
also converts a chemical in the skin to
vitamin D.
• DHA: The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG), recommends
pregnant and lactating women should aim
for an average daily intake of at least 200
milligram docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) a
day in addition to your prenatal vitamins.
Prenatal vitamins, as well as DHA, can
be purchased over-the-counter or with
prescription.
• Protein: Protein is an important nutrient
needed for growth and development. Protein
is needed for energy and to build and repair
different parts of your body, especially brain,
muscle and blood. A pregnant woman needs
additional protein for her baby’s growth.
Each person needs different amounts of
protein depending on their size. A woman
weighing 150 pounds needs 75 grams of
protein every day. (To estimate, use your
pre-pregnant weight and divide by two).
Choose a variety of protein-rich foods, which
include seafood, lean meat and poultry,
eggs, beans and peas, soy products, and
unsalted nuts and seeds. Use labels on
packaged food to determine how many
grams of protein each food provides.
• Avoid alcohol: Alcohol has been linked with
premature delivery and low birth weight
babies, as well as fetal alcohol syndrome.
• Caffeine: It is recommended to limit your
caffeine intake to < 200 milligrams per day.
An 8-ounce cup of coffee has about 100
milligrams of caffeine. An 8-ounce cup of
tea has about 25-50 milligrams of caffeine.
Try to minimize intake of caffeinated soda.
• Eat salty foods in moderation: Salt causes
your body to retain water and could lead to
an elevation in your blood pressure.
• Do not diet: Even if you are overweight,
your pregnancy is not an acceptable time
to lose weight. You or your baby could be
missing essential nutrients for good growth.
Are there foods that are harmful to eat
during pregnancy?
There are specific foods that you will want to
avoid during your pregnancy. Hormonal
changes during pregnancy can have a negative
effect on your immune system and put you at
greater risk for contracting a food-borne illness.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) has found that contracting the food-
borne illness listeria during pregnancy can
cause premature delivery, miscarriage and even
fetal death. Pregnant women are 10 times
more likely to contract listeria.
• You can decrease your chances of
contracting listeria by using caution
consuming hot dogs, deli meats (e.g.,
bologna), or fermented or dry sausages
unless they are heated to an internal
temperature of 165°F or until steaming hot
just before serving.
• Avoid getting fluid from hot dog and lunch
meat packages on other foods, utensils and
food preparation surfaces, and wash hands
after handling hot dogs, luncheon meats
and deli meats.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |14Return to Table of Contents
• Do not eat soft cheese such as feta, queso
blanco, queso fresco, brie, Camembert,
blue-veined, or panela (queso panela) unless
it is labeled as made with pasteurized milk.
Make sure the label says, “MADE WITH
PASTEURIZED MILK.”
• Pay attention to labels. Do not eat
refrigerated pâté or meat spreads from a
deli or meat counter or from the refrigerated
section of a store. Foods that do not need
refrigeration, like canned or shelf-stable
pâté and meat spreads, are safe to eat.
Refrigerate after opening.
• Other foods that are more likely to cause
foodborne illnesses include sushi, rare or
undercooked meats and poultry (chicken),
beef, raw eggs, Caesar dressing and
mayonnaise. For more information on
listeria, go to the CDC, www.cdc.gov/
listeria/prevention.html.
Another food of concern for pregnant women
is fish. Although fish is a low-fat, healthful
protein choice, certain fish have elevated levels
of methyl mercury or polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), a pollutant in the environment.
Consuming fish with high levels of methyl
mercury during pregnancy has been associated
with brain damage and developmental delay
for babies.
• Eating 2-3 servings a week of a variety
of fish lower in mercury is safe and
recommended for pregnant women.
• The March of Dimes recommends pregnant
women avoid all raw and seared fish.
Raw fish includes sushi and sashimi,
undercooked fin fish, and under-cooked
shellfish (such as under-cooked oysters,
clams, mussels and scallops).
• Avoid shark, swordfish, king mackerel and
tile fish even when cooked as they have
higher levels of mercury.
• The March of Dimes cautions against eating
fish that may contain higher levels of PCBs.
Fish in this category include blue fish, bass,
freshwater salmon, pike, trout and walleye.
For more information on safe fish, visit the
CDC or the March of Dimes websites.
How much weight should I gain?
Gaining the right amount of weight during
pregnancy by eating a balanced diet is a
good sign that your baby is getting all of the
nutrients he or she needs and is growing at a
healthy rate.
Weight gain should be slow and gradual.
In general, you should gain about two to
four pounds during your first three months
of pregnancy and one pound a week for the
remainder of the pregnancy. A woman of
normal weight before pregnancy can expect to
gain 15 to 35 pounds during the pregnancy.
You may need to gain more or less depending
on whether you are underweight or overweight
when you get pregnant. Recommendations also
differ if you are carrying more than one baby.
Where does all the weight go?
• Baby: 6 to 8 pounds.
• Placenta: 2 to 3 pounds.
• Blood supply: 3 to 4 pounds.
• Amniotic fluid: 2 to 3 pounds.
• Breast tissue: 0 to 3 pounds.
• Fat stores for delivery and breastfeeding
(remainder of weight).
• Uterus increase: 2 to 5 pounds.
Total: 15 to 35 pounds.
What if I am gaining too much weight?
Try to get your weight back on track. Don’t
consider losing weight or stopping weight gain
altogether. You should try to slow your weight
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |15Return to Table of Contents
gain to recommended amounts, depending on
your trimester. During the first trimester, you
should gain two to four pounds total; during
the second and third trimester, you should gain
one pound per week. Consider trying these diet
changes to gain weight more slowly:
• Eat the appropriate portion size and avoid
second helpings.
• Choose low-fat dairy products.
• Exercise. Consider walking or swimming on
most if not all days.
• Use low-fat cooking methods.
• Limit sweets and high-calorie snacks.
• Limit sweet and sugary drinks.
What if I am not gaining enough weight?
Every woman is different and not everyone
will gain at the same rate. You should talk
to your doctor if you are concerned that you
are not gaining enough. Weight gain can be
hindered by nausea and morning sickness.
(See suggestions for when you are not feeling
well.) Excessive vomiting can be a symptom
of hyperemesis gravidarum, which you should
discuss with your doctor.
Consider trying these diet changes to gain
weight within appropriate ranges:
• Eat more frequently. Try eating five to six
times per day.
• Choose nutrient and calorically dense foods
such as dried fruit, nuts, crackers with
peanut butter, and ice cream.
• Add a little extra cheese, honey, margarine,
or sugar to the foods you are eating.
What can I eat if I am not feeling well?
Pregnancy symptoms vary. Some women may
have difficulty with morning sickness, diarrhea
or constipation. Here are a few suggestions
on how to deal with these symptoms. You
may also see the “Medicine Guidelines During
Pregnancy” section of this book for safe over-
the-counter medicine that may assist with
symptoms.
Morning sickness: For morning sickness, try
eating crackers, cereal or pretzels before you
get out of bed. Eat small meals more frequently
throughout the day. Avoid fatty, fried foods.
Constipation: Increase your fiber intake by
eating high fiber cereal and fresh fruits and
vegetables. Also, make sure you are drinking
plenty of water—at least 10 to 12 glasses
per day.
Diarrhea: Increase your intake of foods
containing pectin and gum fiber to help
absorb excess water. Good choices include
applesauce, bananas, white rice, oatmeal
and refined wheat bread.
Heartburn: Eat small, frequent meals
throughout the day, eat slowly and chew
thoroughly, avoid spicy or rich foods, and
caffeine. Drink fluids between meals, and
limit fluid intake during meals. Try not to
lie down after eating a meal, and keep your
head elevated when lying down. Refer to
the “Medicine Guidelines During Pregnancy”
section in this book for safe heartburn
medications.
Are cravings normal?
Many women will have food cravings during
pregnancy, but others do not. If you have food
cravings, it’s OK to indulge as long as it fits
into a healthy diet and does not occur too
often.
If you are craving non-food items, such as ice,
laundry detergent, dirt, clay, ashes or paint
chips, you may have a condition known as
pica. You should discuss this with your doctor
immediately. Eating non-food items can be
harmful to you and your baby and may be
a sign of a nutritional deficiency.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |16Return to Table of Contents
Dental Care During Pregnancy
It’s vitally important for you to take good care
of your oral health while you are pregnant
Pregnancy increases your risk of developing
gum disease.
Oral health can affect the health of your
developing baby and dental infections have
been linked to preterm labor.
Below are some suggestions for maintaining
good oral health as well as your baby’s health
and safety before, during and after your
pregnancy.
While you are pregnant
• Tell your dental care providers if you know
you are pregnant. This will help them plan
for any treatments or procedures. It’s always
best to complete any major dental treatment
before pregnancy. Routine dental care,
on the other hand, can be received during
the second trimester. As a precautionary
measure, dental treatments during the
first trimester and second half of the third
trimester should be avoided as much as
possible. These are critical times in the
baby’s growth and development, and it’s
simply wise to avoid exposing the mother to
procedures that could in any way influence
the baby’s growth and development. All
elective dental procedures should be
postponed until after the delivery.
• Tell your dentist the names and dosages of
all medicines you are taking (including
medicines and prenatal vitamins prescribed
by your doctor) as well as any specific
medical advice your doctor has given
you to follow. Your dentist might need to
alter your dental treatment plan based on
this information. Certain drugs, such as
tetracycline, can affect the development of
your child’s teeth and should not be given
during pregnancy.
• Avoid dental X-rays during pregnancy. If
X-rays are essential, your dentist will use
a shield to safeguard you and your baby.
Advances in dentistry have made X-rays
much safer today than in past decades.
• Don’t skip your dental checkup appointment
simply because you are pregnant.
• Follow good oral hygiene practices to
prevent and/or reduce gingival problems,
including brushing your teeth at least twice
a day and flossing at least once a day. Use
a good-quality, soft-bristled toothbrush. Use
a toothpaste that contains fluoride, and
brush for at least two minutes to remove the
plaque that forms on your teeth.
• If morning sickness is keeping you from
brushing your teeth, change to a bland-
tasting toothpaste during your pregnancy.
Ask your dentist or hygienist to recommend
brands.
• Rinse your mouth out with water or a mouth
rinse if you suffer from morning sickness
and have frequent bouts of vomiting.
• Ask your dentist about the need for fluoride
supplements. Since fluoride is found in
water and almost all brands of toothpaste,
fluoride supplementation might not be
necessary.
• Avoid sugary snacks. Sweet cravings are
common during pregnancy. However,
keep in mind that the more frequently you
snack, the greater the chance of developing
tooth decay. Additionally, some bacteria
responsible for tooth decay are passed from
the mother to the child, so be careful of
what you eat.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |17Return to Table of Contents
• Eat a healthy, balanced diet. Your baby’s
first teeth begin to develop about three
months into your pregnancy. Healthy diets
containing dairy products, cheese and
yogurt are good sources of these essential
minerals and are good for your baby’s
developing teeth, gums and bones.
• Consult with your dentist or doctor about
the need for anesthesia or other medicines
should a dental emergency arise. Make sure
you tell all healthcare providers you come
into contact with that you are pregnant.
This information could change their
treatment plans.
• If you experienced any gum problems during
pregnancy, such as gingivitis or a pregnancy
tumor (a non-cancerous growth in the
gums), see your dentist soon after delivery
to have your entire mouth examined and
your periodontal health evaluated.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |18Return to Table of Contents
Global Obstetrical Care
Most commercial payers cover obstetrical
care as “global” care. Each insurance plan is
different and you are strongly encouraged to
review your benefit plans to ensure what is and
is not covered. Your out-of-pocket responsibility
depends on your insurance plan.
For insurance plans that do not include
obstetrical services, you will work with a
Cleveland Clinic financial counselor, who
will help guide you through your financial
responsibility.
Global obstetrical care includes all services
provided to the patient in an uncomplicated
pregnancy. The global care includes routine
antepartum care, delivery and postpartum
care.
Antepartum services include:
• Monthly visits up to 28 weeks
(approximately five to six).
• Biweekly visits from 28 to 36 weeks
(approximately four).
• Weekly visits from 36 weeks until delivery
(approximately three to four).
• Initial and subsequent history and
physical exams.
• Routine urinalysis.
Delivery services include:
• Admission to the hospital.
• Admitting history and physical exam.
• Management of uncomplicated labor.
• Delivery (vaginal or C-section).
• Delivery of placenta.
• All routine inpatient care following delivery.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |19Return to Table of Contents
HIV Testing
What is HIV?
HIV is the abbreviation for human
immunodeficiency virus, the virus that causes
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
The virus weakens a person’s ability to fight
infections and cancers. A person can get
HIV by coming into contact with an infected
person’s body fluids (including blood, semen,
vaginal fluids and breast milk). HIV can be
spread through:
• Vaginal, oral or anal sex.
• Sharing unclean needles to take drugs.
• Pregnancy (from mother to baby).
• Blood transfusions. (Since 1985, blood
donations have been routinely tested for HIV,
so infection from blood transfusions is rare.)
About the test
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) recommends that screening for HIV
infection should be performed routinely for
all patients aged 13 to 64 in all healthcare
settings. We will order a HIV test for you as
part of your routine blood work. The results of
the test remain a part of your medical records
and are treated the same way as any other part
of your medical record. If you do not want to
have a HIV test done, you will need to let us
know before we do the blood test.
Given the serious nature of HIV infection and
the high likelihood of success in preventing
perinatal transmission, it is critically important
that pregnant women be tested for HIV.
As a result, the U.S. Public Health Service
has recommended universal HIV testing of
pregnant women since 1995.
• If you are pregnant and are HIV positive,
it is critical that you take medications
to help protect your unborn baby from
becoming infected.
• If HIV infection is found, your healthcare
provider can provide more appropriate care.
You can also learn ways to stay healthy longer.
• HIV testing helps prevent the spread of HIV.
Do I have to take the test?
No. In Ohio, HIV testing is voluntary and
should be made by you and your caregiver. In
Florida, the law requires your caregiver to order
the test, but patients are free to decline testing.
Neither your decision about whether to be
tested nor the tests results themselves will
prevent you from receiving healthcare. Please
be advised that if you choose not to be HIV
tested during pregnancy, the state mandates
that your baby be screened for HIV after
birth. Therefore, if you have a negative test
during your pregnancy, it will likely prevent
testing on your baby after birth. Also, if it
is not known whether you are HIV positive,
breastfeeding— an important part of proper
care for your baby—may be delayed. You
may choose to visit one of the many sites
that offer anonymous testing for HIV. These
places perform HIV tests without even taking
your name. An anonymous HIV test does
not become part of your medical record. For
more information on anonymous testing, call
the hotline in Ohio at 1.800.332.AIDS or in
Florida at 1.800.FLA.AIDS.
What does a negative test result mean?
A negative test means no signs of HIV infection
were found in your blood.
Rarely, the test may be negative when you have
HIV. This can happen if you have recently
acquired the HIV virus. For this reason, if you
are at risk for continued exposure to HIV or may
have been recently exposed to HIV, you should
be tested again two to three months later.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |20Return to Table of Contents
Vaccination During Pregnancy
Why is vaccination necessary?
Vaccines strengthen people’s immune
systems so their bodies can fight off
serious infectious diseases. Vaccines also
benefit society by preventing the spread of
communicable diseases.
Why do pregnant women need to
be vaccinated?
Many women might not realize they are not
up-to-date on their immunizations and are
susceptible to diseases that can harm them
or their unborn child. Pregnant women should
talk to their physicians to figure out which
vaccines they might need and whether they
should get them during pregnancy or wait
until after their child is born.
How do I know if a vaccine’s ingredients
are safe?
All vaccines are tested for safety under
the supervision of the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). The vaccines are
checked for purity, potency and safety, and
the FDA and Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) monitor the safety of each
vaccine for as long as it is in use. Some people
might be allergic to an ingredient in a vaccine,
such as eggs in the influenza vaccine, and
should not receive the vaccine until they have
talked to their doctors.
Can a vaccine harm my unborn child?
A number of vaccines, especially live-virus
vaccines, should not be given to pregnant
women because they might be harmful to the
baby. (A live-virus vaccine is made using the
live strains of a virus.) Some vaccines can
be given to the mother in the second or third
trimester of pregnancy, while others should
only be administered either at one to three
months before conception or immediately after
the baby is born. Vaccines that are offered
during pregnancy, such as the flu shot, are
recommended for pregnant women.
What happens if I am exposed to a
disease while I am pregnant?
Depending on the circumstances, your doctor
will weigh the risks of vaccination against the
benefits the vaccine can provide.
Which vaccines should I receive while
I am pregnant?
The following vaccines are considered
safe to give to women who might be at risk
of infection:
COVID-19: This vaccine can prevent serious
illness in the mother during pregnancy. You
can receive the vaccine at any stage of your
pregnancy. The Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) recommends that all
pregnant women receive the COVID-19 shot.
Hepatitis B: Pregnant women who are at high
risk for this disease and have tested negative
for the virus can receive this vaccine. It is
used to protect the mother and baby against
infection both before and after delivery.
Influenza: This vaccine can prevent serious
illness in the mother during pregnancy. You
can receive the vaccine at any stage of your
pregnancy. The CDC recommends that all
pregnant women receive the flu shot.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |21Return to Table of Contents
Tetanus/Diphtheria (Tdap): Tdap should be
administered during pregnancy, preferably
during the third trimester (after 20 weeks of
gestation). If you or your family members did
not receive this vaccination during pregnancy,
Tdap should be administered immediately
after your baby is born, while you are
still in the hospital, to ensure pertussis or
whooping cough immunity and reduce the
risk of transmission to the newborn. The CDC
recommends that all pregnant women receive
this vaccine, please accept this vaccine.
Which vaccines should pregnant
women avoid?
The following vaccines can potentially be
transmitted to the unborn child and might
result in miscarriage, premature birth or
birth defects:
• Hepatitis A: The safety of this vaccine
hasn’t been determined and it should be
avoided during pregnancy. Women at high
risk for exposure to this virus should discuss
the risks and benefits with their doctors.
• Measles, Mumps, Rubella (MMR): Women
should wait at least one month to become
pregnant after receiving these live-virus
vaccines. If the initial rubella test shows you
are rubella non-immune, then you will be
given the vaccine after delivery.
• Varicella: This vaccine, used to prevent
chicken pox, should be given at least one
month before pregnancy.
• Pneumococcal: Because the safety of this
vaccine is unknown, it should be avoided
in pregnancy except for women who are at
high risk or have a chronic illness.
• Oral Polio Vaccine and Inactivated Polio
Vaccine: Neither the live-virus (OPV) nor
the inactivated-virus (IPV) version of this
vaccine is recommended for pregnant
women. Also, the risk of getting polio in the
United States is very low.
What side effects can I expect after
a vaccination?
Side effects vary from none to those that can
occur up to three weeks after vaccination.
If you experience any severe side effects,
be sure to tell your doctor. Side effects
can include:
• Fatigue.
• Fever.
• Headache.
• Non-contagious rash or red bumps.
• Pain in joints.
• Severe allergic reaction in very rare cases.
• Soreness and redness at injection site.
• Swelling of neck glands and cheeks.
Ask for a vaccine information sheet on the
vaccine you have received, or visit the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, http://
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/spec-grps/pregnant.htm.
What if I never had chicken pox?
If you have had chicken pox, you are immune.
If you have not had the chicken pox, you have
likely received the varicella vaccine. If you
haven’t, you may still be immune. A blood
test can make this determination. If you are
non-immune and are exposed to active
chicken pox, call your doctor’s office for
direction.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |22Return to Table of Contents
Sexually Transmitted Infections and Pregnancy
Sexually transmitted infections, commonly
called STIs, are infections that are spread by
having sex with someone who has an STI.
Sexually transmitted infections are passed on
from sexual activity that involves the mouth,
anus or vagina.
Pregnant women with an STI may infect their
baby before, during or after the baby’s birth.
For this reason, your healthcare provider will
screen you for most STIs at your first prenatal
visit. If you have sex with someone who is
infected after your initial screening, you will
need to be tested again.
Treatment of STIs is the best way to protect
you and your baby.
STIs include:
• Chlamydia.
• Genital herpes.
• Gonorrhea.
• Hepatitis B.
• HIV/AIDS.
• HPV/Genital warts.
• Syphilis.
• Trichomonas vaginalis (“trich”).
What are the symptoms of STIs?
Sometimes, there are no symptoms. If
symptoms are present, they might include:
• Bumps, sores or warts near the mouth,
anus, penis or vagina.
• Swelling or redness near the penis
or vagina.
• Skin rash.
• Painful urination.
• Weight loss, loose stools, night sweats.
• Aches, pains, fever and chills.
• Yellowing of the skin (jaundice).
• Discharge from the penis or vagina (vaginal
discharge might have an odor).
• Bleeding from the vagina other than during
a monthly period.
• Painful sex.
• Severe itching near the penis or vagina.
How can STIs affect my pregnancy and
treatment options?
• Chlamydia: Pregnancy seems to be
unaffected by chlamydia infection. However,
infants exposed to the infection at birth can
develop severe eye infections or pneumonia
Mothers with chlamydia are treated with
antibiotics and all newborn babies are given
antibiotic eye ointment after birth to prevent
infections.
• Genital herpes: Herpes infection in pregnant
women is relatively safe until she gets ready
to deliver. Active herpes lesions on the
genitals are contagious and can infect the
infant during childbirth. Thus, many women
are delivered via cesarean section.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |23Return to Table of Contents
Antiviral medications can be given, and a
Cesarean section may be indicated.
• Gonorrhea: If contracted during pregnancy,
the infection can cause mouth sores, fever
and blood stream infections. The baby
is usually unaffected, but if the baby is
born while the mother has an active
infection, the baby may develop an eye
infection or blindness, joint infections,
or blood infections.
Mothers with gonorrhea are treated with
antibiotics and all newborn babies are given
antibiotic eye ointment after birth to prevent
infections.
• Hepatitis B: This is a liver infection
caused by the hepatitis B virus. If a pregnant
woman is infected with hepatitis B, she can
transmit the infection to the fetus through
the placenta, infecting the newborn baby. In
addition, women with hepatitis B are more
likely to have premature deliveries. However,
early screening and vaccination can prevent
the worst outcomes of this infection.
If you have hepatitis B, your doctor will
give your newborn baby an injection of
antibodies and a vaccine to prevent the
baby from becoming infected.
• HIV/AIDS: Thanks to the advent of
powerful medication combinations,
transmission of HIV infection to your
infant is almost completely preventable.
However, if the disease is passed on, the
baby may develop HIV.
Although HIV/AIDS is an incurable disease,
you can prevent transmitting the virus to
your baby by taking various medications.
• HPV/genital warts: The human
papillomavirus (HPV), which can cause
genital warts, is a common STI that can
present with lesions or may have no
symptoms at all.
If you contract genital warts during
pregnancy, treatment may be delayed until
after you deliver. Delivery is only affected
if large genital warts are present, and your
healthcare provider will discuss delivery
options with you.
• Syphilis: Syphilis is easily passed on to
your unborn child and is likely to cause
fatal infections. Untreated infants can be
born premature or develop problems in
multiple organs, including eyes, ears,
heart, skin and bones.
Your healthcare provider will likely prescribe
antibiotics to you during pregnancy to
reduce the risk of transmission to your baby.
• Trichomonas vaginalis: This is a
parasite that causes vaginal discharge.
If left untreated, babies can be premature
and have low birth weight.
This infection is easily treatable with
antibiotics.
If you are given an antibiotic to treat an
STI, it’s important that you take all of your
medicine, even if the symptoms go away.
Also, never take someone else’s medicine
to treat your illness. By doing so, you might
make it more difficult to treat the infection.
Likewise, you should not share your medicine
with others.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |24Return to Table of Contents
How can I protect myself from STIs?
Here are some basic steps you can take to help
protect yourself from STIs:
• Not having sex is the only sure way to
prevent STIs.
• Use a condom every time you have sex.
(If you use a lubricant, make sure it is
water-based).
• Limit your number of sex partners.
• Practice monogamy. This means having sex
with only one person. That person must also
have sex with only you to reduce your risk.
• Get checked for STIs. Don’t risk giving
the infection to someone else or your baby.
Just because you have been screened in
early pregnancy, doesn’t mean you can’t
contract an STI later in pregnancy. If you
have engaged in unprotected sex since
your initial STI screening, please request
another set of STI screenings from your
healthcare provider.
• Don’t use alcohol or drugs before you have
sex, especially when pregnant. You might
be less likely to practice safe sex if you are
drunk or high.
• Know the signs and symptoms of STIs. Look
for them in yourself and your sex partners.
• Learn about STIs. The more you know about
STIs, the better you can protect yourself.
How can I prevent spreading a sexually
transmitted infection?
• Stop having sex until you see a healthcare
provider and are treated.
• Follow your healthcare provider’s
instructions for treatment.
• Use condoms whenever you have sex,
especially with new partners.
• Don’t resume having sex unless your
healthcare provider says it’s OK.
• Return to your healthcare provider to
get rechecked.
• Be sure your sex partner or partners also
are treated.
Where can I learn more?
The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) Hotline
1.800.232.4636
http://www.cdc.gov/std/default.htm
The Florida Department of Health
1.850.245.4303
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |25Return to Table of Contents
How Smoking Affects You and Your Baby
During Pregnancy
Smoking during pregnancy affects you and
your baby’s health before, during and after
your baby is born. The nicotine (the addictive
substance in cigarettes), carbon monoxide,
lead, arsenic, and numerous other poisons
you inhale from a cigarette are carried through
your bloodstream and go directly to your baby.
Smoking while pregnant will:
• Lower the amount of oxygen available to
you and your growing baby.
• Increase the chances of miscarriage,
stillbirth and Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome (SIDS).
• Increase the risk that your baby is born
prematurely and/or born with low birth weight.
• Increase your baby’s risk of developing
respiratory problems.
The more cigarettes you smoke, the greater
your baby’s chances of developing these and
other health problems. There is no safe level
of smoking for your baby’s health.
Using electronic cigarettes (vaping) during
pregnancy isn’t safe. Most electronic cigarettes
(e-cigarettes) contain nicotine, which
permanently damages a baby’s developing
brain and many other organs. E-cigarette
liquids also contain chemicals, flavors and
other additives that might not be safe for
your baby.
Use of marijuana during pregnancy might
increase the risk of having a baby that is
smaller at birth. It might also slightly increase
the risk of stillbirth. Using marijuana during
pregnancy can also harm your health. The
American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists recommends against using
marijuana during pregnancy.
How does second-hand smoke affect me
and my baby?
Second-hand smoke (also called passive
smoke or environmental tobacco smoke) is the
combination of smoke from a burning cigarette
and smoke exhaled by a smoker. The smoke
that burns off the end of a cigarette or cigar
contains more harmful substances (tar, carbon
monoxide, nicotine and others) than the smoke
inhaled by the smoker.
The American Cancer Society states that if
you are regularly exposed to second-hand
smoke, you increase your and your baby’s
risk of developing lung cancer, heart disease,
emphysema, allergies, asthma and other
health problems. Babies exposed to second-
hand smoke might also develop reduced lung
capacity and are at higher risk for sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS).
What happens if I keep smoking after my
baby is born?
If you continue to smoke after your baby is
born, you may reduce your supply of breast
milk. You also increase increase his or her
chance of developing certain illnesses and
problems, such as:
• Frequent colds.
• Bronchitis and pneumonia.
• Asthma/wheezing.
• Chronic cough.
• Ear infections.
• High blood pressure.
• Learning and behavior problems later in
childhood.
• Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS).
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |26Return to Table of Contents
Why should I quit smoking?
Smoking is the leading cause of preventable
death in the United States. By quitting
you can:
• Prolong your life.
• Lower your risk of heart disease.
• Lower your risk of developing lung, throat,
mouth, pancreatic and bladder cancer.
• Lower your risk of developing breathing
problems, such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma
and emphysema.
• Lower your risk of developing allergies.
• Raise your energy level.
• Improve your appearance. Your skin will
wrinkle less and look better, and your fingers
and teeth will not be yellow.
• Improve your sense of smell and taste.
• Feel healthier overall, with improved
self-esteem.
• Save a lot of money (the average smoker
spends $2,000 a year for cigarettes).
How can I quit smoking?
There is no one way to quit smoking that
works for everyone, since each person has
different smoking habits. Here are some tips:
• Hide your matches, lighters and ashtrays.
• Designate your home a non-smoking area.
• Ask people who smoke not to smoke
around you.
Decrease caffeine intake. This can decrease
your urge to smoke. Also, avoid alcohol, as it
also might increase your urge to smoke and is
harmful to your baby.
• Change your habits connected with
smoking. If you smoke while driving or
when feeling stressed, try other activities to
replace smoking.
• Keep mints or gum (preferably sugarless) on
hand for those times when you get the urge
to smoke.
• Stay active to keep your mind off smoking
and to relieve tension. Take a walk, exercise
or read a book.
• Avoid places where many people smoke.
Look for support from others. Join a
support group or smoking cessation
program, such as Cleveland Clinic’s
Smoking Cessation Program. For more
information, please call 440.312.6741, or
visit https//my.clevelandclinic.org/tobacco.
Ohio Quit Line:
1.800.QUIT.NOW (1.800.784.8669);
www.smokefree.gov.
Florida Quit Line:
1.877.U.CAN.NOW (1.877.822.6669);
www.tobaccofreeflorida.com
Should I use a nicotine replacement to
help me quit?
Discuss with your healthcare provider whether
nicotine replacement therapy is appropriate
for you.
How will I feel when I quit?
The benefits of not smoking start within
days of quitting. After you quit, you and
your baby’s heartbeat will return to normal,
and your baby will be less likely to develop
breathing problems.
You might have symptoms of withdrawal
because your body is used to nicotine, the
addictive substance in cigarettes. You might
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |27Return to Table of Contents
crave cigarettes, be irritable, feel fatigued and
very hungry, cough often, get headaches, or
have difficulty concentrating.
The withdrawal symptoms are only temporary.
They are strongest when you first quit but
will go away within 10 to 14 days. When
withdrawal symptoms occur, stay in control.
Think about your reasons for quitting. Remind
yourself that these are signs that your body
is healing and getting used to being without
cigarettes. Remember that withdrawal
symptoms are easier to treat than the
major disease that smoking can cause.
Even after the withdrawal is over, expect
periodic urges to smoke. However, these
cravings are generally brief and will go
away whether you smoke or not.
Don’t smoke.
If you smoke again (called a relapse), do not
lose hope. Seventy-five percent of those who
quit relapse. Most smokers quit three times
before they are successful. If you relapse, don’t
give up. Plan ahead and think about what you
will do next time you get the urge to smoke.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |28Return to Table of Contents
High Blood Pressure (Hypertension) During Pregnancy
During pregnancy, high blood pressure
(hypertension) can affect the body in different
ways than it normally would. Hypertension,
especially if it is not well controlled, can cause
complications during pregnancy for both the
mother and the baby.
What is high blood pressure?
Blood pressure is the force of blood pushing
against blood vessel walls. The heart pumps
blood into the arteries (blood vessels) that
carry the blood throughout the body. High
blood pressure means that the pressure in the
arteries is above the normal range.
What are the different forms of high
blood pressure during pregnancy?
High blood pressure complicates about 10%
of all pregnancies. There are several different
types of high blood pressure during pregnancy.
These types vary in severity and impact on the
body and the pregnancy. The forms of high
blood pressure during pregnancy include:
• Chronic hypertension: High blood pressure
that is present before pregnancy.
• Gestational hypertension: High blood
pressure that first occurs at 20 weeks
of pregnancy or later, but no other
signs or symptoms of preeclampsia are
present. Some women will later develop
preeclampsia, while others probably had
high blood pressure (chronic hypertension)
before the pregnancy.
• Preeclampsia: A condition only found
in pregnancy. Often after 20 weeks of
pregnancy. Preeclampsia is high blood
pressure, typically with protein in the
urine. It can cause complications with
your kidneys, liver and other organs.
Preeclampsia can be associated with
seizures (eclampsia). Preeclampsia can
also effect the placenta, which can lead
to small babies.
• Chronic hypertension with superimposed
preeclampsia: Preeclampsia, which
develops in someone who has chronic
hypertension (high blood pressure
before pregnancy).
Who is at higher risk of developing
preeclampsia during pregnancy?
A woman is more likely to develop
preeclampsia if this is her first pregnancy,
if she is pregnant with more than one baby,
or if she had preeclampsia with a previous
pregnancy.
She also is at higher risk for preeclampsia if
she has the following:
• Chronic hypertension (high blood pressure
before becoming pregnant)
• Diabetes before becoming pregnant
• Gestational diabetes
• Blood clotting disorders
• Lupus
• Obesity with a BMI >30
• Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
• Maternal age 35 years or older
• Has had gestational hypertension or
preeclampsia during past pregnancies
• Has a family history of gestational
hypertension
• Kidney disease
• Had in vitro fertilization
• Obstructive sleep apnea
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |29Return to Table of Contents
What are the signs and symptoms of
preeclampsia?
• Two episodes, at least four hours apart, of
high blood pressure: systolic pressure of
140 mmHg or higher, or diastolic pressure
of 90 mmHg or higher.
• Protein in your urine
• Low platelets
• Kidney issues
• Liver issues
• Fluid in your lungs
• New headache that won’t go away
• Floaters or flashers in your vision
What is the danger of high blood pressure
(hypertension) during pregnancy?
High blood pressure (hypertension) during
pregnancy can prevent the placenta from
receiving enough blood, oxygen and nutrients.
The lowered amount of blood to the placenta
can lead to a low birth weight. Other
complications can occur from high blood
pressure during pregnancy. These conditions
do not happen to all women with high blood
pressure. They can include:
• Seizures in the mother.
• Stroke.
• Temporary kidney failure.
• Liver problems.
• Poor growth in the baby.
• Low fluid around the baby.
• Placental abruption (placenta detaching
from the uterus).
• Preterm delivery.
Can high blood pressure (hypertension)
during pregnancy be prevented?
Since the cause of high blood pressure during
pregnancy is not known, it is not a condition
that can usually be prevented. In women
at high risk for developing preeclampsia,
taking baby aspirin daily for prevention is
recommended. High blood pressure during
pregnancy can sometimes be managed and
controlled with the help of a healthcare
provider. However, sometimes preeclampsia
will require delivery of the baby. Your blood
pressure will be checked regularly during
prenatal appointments. If you have any
concerns about your blood pressure, speak
with your healthcare provider.
Will I still have high blood pressure
(hypertension) after the baby is
delivered?
High blood pressure during pregnancy typically
goes away after the baby is delivered but
increases the risk of high blood pressure and
heart disease in the future. Women who had
chronic hypertension before pregnancy will
usually still have the condition after delivery.
Sometimes, blood pressure can remain
high after delivery, requiring treatment with
medication. Your healthcare provider will work
with you after your pregnancy to manage your
blood pressure.
References
• ACOG Practice Bulletin Number 222.
June 2020: Gestational Hypertension
and Preeclampsia.
• U.S. Department of Health & Human
Services, Office on Women’s Health.
Pregnancy Complications. Accessed
1/22/2019.
• March of Dimes. High Blood Pressure
During Pregnancy. Accessed 1/22/2019.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |30Return to Table of Contents
Gestational Diabetes
What is gestational diabetes?
Gestational diabetes is a condition where
carbohydrate intolerance develops during
pregnancy. This can lead to high blood sugar
(glucose) levels. About 2-10% of all pregnant
women in the U.S. are diagnosed with
gestational diabetes.
Am I at risk for gestational diabetes?
These factors increase your risk of developing
diabetes during pregnancy:
• Being overweight or obese before
becoming pregnant.
• Family history of diabetes (if your parents
or siblings have diabetes).
• Being over age 25.
• Previously giving birth to a baby that
weighed more than 9 pounds.
• Previously giving birth to a stillborn baby.
• Having gestational diabetes with an
earlier pregnancy.
• Being diagnosed with pre-diabetes.
• Having polycystic ovary syndrome.
• Being Black, Hispanic/Latino, Asian-
American, American Indian, or Pacific
Islander American.
• Having high blood pressure before
pregnancy.
• Having high cholesterol before pregnancy.
Keep in mind that half of women who
develop gestational diabetes have no known
risk factors.
What causes gestational diabetes?
Gestational diabetes is caused by some
hormonal changes that occur in all women
during pregnancy. The placenta is the organ
that connects the baby (by the umbilical cord)
to the uterus and transfers nutrients from
the mother to the baby. Increased levels of
certain hormones made in the placenta can
prevent insulin—a hormone that controls blood
glucose—from managing glucose properly.
This condition is called insulin resistance. As
the placenta grows larger during pregnancy, it
produces more hormones and increases this
insulin resistance. When this happens, more
insulin is needed to keep glucose levels in a
safe range.
Usually, the mother’s pancreas is able to
produce more insulin (about three times
the normal amount) to overcome the insulin
resistance. If it cannot, glucose levels will rise,
resulting in gestational diabetes.
How is gestational diabetes diagnosed?
Gestational diabetes is usually diagnosed
between the 24th and 28th week of pregnancy
(when insulin resistance usually begins). If
you had gestational diabetes before, or if you
have risk factors for gestational diabetes, the
test may be performed before the 13th week
of pregnancy. If the early test is normal, you
will be tested again around the 28th week of
pregnancy.
To screen for gestational diabetes, you will take
a test called the oral glucose tolerance test.
You quickly drink a sweetened liquid, which
contains 50g of glucose. The body absorbs
this glucose rapidly, causing blood sugar levels
to rise within 30-60 minutes. A blood sample
will be taken from a vein in your arm about 60
minutes after drinking the solution. The blood
test measures how the glucose solution was
processed by your body.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |31Return to Table of Contents
If your test results are not normal, you will
have a similar type of diabetes test in which
you have to fast (not eat anything) for 6-8
hours before the test. You will have your
blood drawn when you get to the lab. Then,
you will quickly drink a sweetened liquid
and blood glucose level will be drawn one
hour, two hours and three hours later. If two or
more of the glucose levels are above the goal
range, you have gestational diabetes.
How is gestational diabetes managed?
Gestational diabetes is managed by:
• Checking your blood sugar levels fasting in
the morning and one hour after the start of
each meal.
• Following specific dietary guidelines given
by your doctor, dietitian, or diabetes
educator.
• Exercising.
• Taking insulin, if necessary.
How do I monitor my blood sugar if I
have gestational diabetes?
Testing your blood sugar at certain times of the
day will help determine if your exercise and
eating patterns are keeping your blood glucose
levels in control, or if you need to take insulin
to protect your developing baby. Your doctor
will tell you when and how often to test your
blood glucose.
You may be instructed to check your
blood sugar:
• When you wake up in the morning (fasting).
• Just before meals.
• 1 hour after the start of each meal.
• Target blood glucose reading.
• Fasting 70-95 mg/dL.
• 1 hour after the start of each meal
<140 mg/dL.
Testing your blood glucose involves the
following steps:
• Pricking your finger with a lancet (a small,
sharp needle).
• Putting a drop of blood on a test strip.
• Using a blood glucose meter to display
your results.
• Recording the results in a log book.
• Disposing of the lancet and strips properly
(in a used “sharps” container or a hard
plastic container, such as a laundry
detergent bottle).
Your doctor, nurse or diabetes educator will
show you how to use a glucose meter. Bring
your blood glucose log with you to your doctor
appointments and send them in to the doctor
taking care of your diabetes weekly. He or she
can evaluate how well your glucose levels are
controlled, and can decide if changes need to
be made to your treatment plan. Remember,
as your placenta grows and makes more
hormones, you will likely need more insulin to
keep your glucose levels in the normal range.
The goal of monitoring is to keep your blood
glucose as close to normal as possible. The
higher your blood glucose levels are and the
more often they are high, the more likely
you are to have complications during your
pregnancy. Taking insulin during pregnancy
is far safer for you and the baby than high
glucose levels.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |32Return to Table of Contents
How will my diet change if I have
gestational diabetes?
Here are some goals for healthy eating during
pregnancy if you have gestational diabetes:
• Eat three small meals and two or three
snacks at regular times every day. Do not
skip meals or snacks.
• Eat fewer carbohydrates at breakfast than
at other meals because this is when insulin
resistance is the greatest.
• Try to eat the same amount of carbohydrates
during each meal and snack. We recommend
15-30 grams of carbohydrates at breakfast,
30-45 grams at lunch, 45-60 grams at
dinner and 15-30 grams for snacks.
• Always eat carbohydrates with a protein
or fat.
• Choose foods that are high in fiber, such as
whole grain breads, cereals, pasta, rice,
fruits and vegetables.
• Eat foods with less sugar and fat.
• Drink at least 8 cups (or 64 ounces) of
liquids with no sugar per day.
• Make sure you are getting enough vitamins
and minerals in your daily diet. Ask your
doctor about taking a prenatal vitamin and
mineral supplement to meet the nutritional
needs of your pregnancy.
Should I exercise if I have gestational
diabetes?
Every pregnant woman should check with her
doctor before beginning an exercise program.
Your doctor can give you personal exercise
guidelines, based on your medical history.
Thirty minutes of exercise every day, or most
days, will help manage gestational diabetes.
Since both insulin and exercise lower blood
glucose, you should follow these additional
exercise guidelines to avoid a low blood
glucose reaction:
• Always carry some form of sugar, such as
glucose tablets or hard candy.
• Eat one serving of fruit or the equivalent of
15 grams of carbohydrate for most activities
lasting 30 minutes. If you exercise right after
a meal, eat this snack after exercise.
Do I need to take insulin if I have
gestational diabetes?
Based on your blood glucose monitoring
results, your doctor will tell you if you need
to take insulin injections during pregnancy.
If insulin is prescribed for you, your doctor,
nurse, or diabetes educator will teach you
how to give yourself insulin injections.
As your pregnancy progresses, the placenta
will make more pregnancy hormones, and
larger doses of insulin may be needed to
control your blood glucose. Your doctor will
adjust your insulin dosage based on your
blood glucose levels throughout the day.
When using insulin, a low blood glucose
reaction, or hypoglycemia, can occur if you:
• Do not eat enough food.
• Skip a meal.
• Do not eat at the right time of day.
• Exercise more than usual.
• Take too much insulin.
Symptoms of hypoglycemia include:
• Confusion.
• Dizziness.
• Feeling shaky.
• Headaches.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |33Return to Table of Contents
• Sudden hunger.
• Sweating.
• Weakness.
Hypoglycemia is a serious problem that needs
to be treated right away. If you think you are
having a low blood sugar reaction:
• Check your blood sugar if you can.
• If your blood sugar is less than 60 mg/dl,
eat a food that contains sugar, such as
½ cup of orange or apple juice; 1 cup of
skim milk; 4-6 pieces of hard candy (not
sugar- free); ½ cup regular soft drink; or
1 Tbsp. of honey, brown sugar or corn syrup.
• Fifteen minutes after eating one of the foods
listed above, check your blood sugar. If it
is still less than 60 mg/dl, eat another one
of the food choices above and call your
doctor or midwife. If it is more than 45
minutes until your next meal, eat a bread
and protein source to prevent another
reaction.
• Record all low blood sugar reactions in
your log book, including the date, the time
of day the reaction occurred, and how you
treated it.
What are some complications of
gestational diabetes?
All complications during pregnancy related
to diabetes are directly related to glucose
control. The higher the glucose levels are and
the more often the glucose levels are high,
the more likely you and your baby are to have
complications.
Since insulin resistance generally does not
develop until the 24th week of pregnancy,
birth defects are not a common complication
of gestational diabetes. (Birth defects generally
occur during the first trimester of pregnancy.)
Gestational diabetes may increase your risk
of developing high blood pressure during
pregnancy (gestational hypertension or
preeclampsia).
Cesarean deliveries are more common for
women with gestational diabetes.
Babies can grow larger than expected in
the uterus.
Extra amniotic fluid can form around your baby.
During delivery, there is an increased risk
for the baby’s shoulders getting stuck in the
birth canal.
After delivery, your baby is at increased risk
for low blood sugar, jaundice and difficulty
breathing on their own.
Women with gestational diabetes have a 30%
risk of having pre-diabetes or type 2 diabetes
immediately after pregnancy.
50% of women with gestational diabetes will
develop type 2 diabetes in the next 10 years.
Babies born to mothers with diabetes are at an
increased risk for developing type 2 diabetes
and obesity later in life.
How will labor and delivery be different
if I have gestational diabetes?
Labor and delivery are generally not affected
by gestational diabetes. However, if the baby
has grown too large, a cesarean delivery may
be necessary.
It’s important to carefully control blood glucose
levels during labor so that the baby doesn’t
develop a high insulin level (because of a high
blood glucose level in the mother). If your
glucose levels are high, you may need insulin
through an IV during labor. Your blood glucose
level will be checked every 1-2 hours during
active labor and high glucose levels will be
treated with insulin.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |34Return to Table of Contents
What happens to my baby after delivery?
Your baby’s blood glucose level will be tested
immediately after birth. If the blood glucose is
low, your baby will be given formula with sugar
to drink, or glucose through an intravenous
tube in the vein. Your baby may be sent to
the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for
observation during the first few hours after
birth to make sure he or she doesn’t have a
low blood glucose reaction.
If you had gestational diabetes, there is an
increased risk that your newborn will develop
jaundice. Jaundice is a yellow discoloration of
the skin that occurs when there is bilirubin in
the baby’s blood. Bilirubin is a pigment that is
released when extra red blood cells build up in
the blood and can’t be processed fast enough.
Jaundice goes away rapidly with treatment;
one form of treatment is to expose your baby
to special lights.
Babies born to mothers with diabetes
also mature their lungs later and are at an
increased risk for difficulty breathing after
delivery. If this happens, your baby may go to
the NICU for treatment.
Since I have gestational diabetes, does it
mean my baby will have diabetes?
Gestational diabetes does not cause diabetes
in newborns. Your child’s risk of developing
diabetes is related to your glucose control
during pregnancy, family history, body weight,
eating habits and exercise. Breastfeeding can
decrease the risk of your baby developing
diabetes and obesity later in life.
Will I still have diabetes after I deliver
my baby?
Usually, blood glucose levels return to normal
after childbirth because the placenta, which
was producing the extra hormones that caused
insulin resistance, is delivered. Your doctor will
perform a glucose test on you 4 to 12 weeks
after delivery. This test is done fasting and
tests for pre-diabetes and type 2 diabetes.
Women who have had gestational diabetes
have a 60% increased risk of developing type
2 diabetes later in life. Because of this risk,
you should let your primary care doctor know
that you had gestational diabetes so they can
check your blood glucose level during your
regular health checkups every year.
By maintaining an ideal body weight, following
a healthy meal plan, and exercising, you will
be able to reduce your risk of developing type
2 diabetes. Breastfeeding your baby may help
you lose your pregnancy weight and allow your
blood glucose levels to return to normal faster.
In addition, women who have gestational
diabetes during one pregnancy have a 40-50%
chance of developing gestational diabetes in
the next pregnancy. If you had gestational
diabetes during one pregnancy and are
planning to get pregnant again, talk to your
doctor first so that you can make the necessary
lifestyle changes before your next pregnancy.
If you do not develop type 2 diabetes before
your next pregnancy, you should have an early
glucose test at the end of the first trimester
during all of your pregnancies.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |35Return to Table of Contents
Toxoplasmosis and Pregnancy
What is toxoplasmosis?
Toxoplasmosis is an infection caused by the
protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii that
can threaten the health of an unborn child.
You can get the infection from handling soil or
cat litter that contains cat feces infected with
the parasite. You can also get it from eating
undercooked meat from animals infected with
the parasite or from uncooked foods that have
come in contact with contaminated meat. If
you have been infected with Toxoplasma once,
you usually will not become infected again.
What are the symptoms of Toxoplasma?
Because most people with Toxoplasma have
no symptoms, it might be difficult to know if
you have been infected. When symptoms do
appear, they can resemble the flu and include
fever, feeling tired, night sweats, feeling achy
and swollen lymph glands.
If I was infected with Toxoplasma before
my pregnancy, is there a risk to my
unborn baby?
With rare exceptions, women who have been
infected at least six to nine months before
conception develop immunity to Toxoplasma
and do not pass it on to their babies.
What can happen to my baby if I am
infected with Toxoplasma during my
pregnancy?
About one-half of women infected with
Toxoplasma can transmit the infection across
the placenta to the unborn baby. Infection
early in the pregnancy is less likely to be
transmitted to the baby than infection later
in the pregnancy. The rate of transmission to
the developing baby in the first trimester is
10-15%, 25% in the second trimester and
over 60% in the third trimester. However, an
early infection is usually more severe than a
later one.
Most babies infected during pregnancy show
no sign of toxoplasmosis when they are born,
but many of them develop learning, visual and
hearing disabilities later in life.
How can I tell if my unborn baby has
been infected?
If you have maternal toxoplasmosis infection,
there are several ways to check if your unborn
child has been infected:
• The fluid around the fetus or the fetal blood
can be tested for infection.
• About one third of infected babies
have a problem that might be visible on
an ultrasound.
• The baby’s blood can be tested after birth.
Can Toxoplasma be treated during
my pregnancy?
The Toxoplasma infection can be treated during
pregnancy with antibiotic medicine. The earlier
the infection is identified and treated, the
greater the chance of preventing infection of
the unborn child. If the child has already been
infected, treatment can make the disease less
severe. The baby can also be treated in his or
her first year of life.
What can I do to prevent Toxoplasma
infection?
The CDC recommends the following prevention
tips:
Cook foods at safe temperatures (165
degrees Fahrenheit or above) and use a food
thermometer to ensure that meat is cooked
thoroughly, leaving no pink in your meat.
Juices should run clear.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |36Return to Table of Contents
• Peel or thoroughly wash fruits and
vegetables before eating. Wash cutting
boards, dishes, counters, utensils and
hands with hot, soapy water after they
have come in contact with raw foods.
• Wear gloves when gardening and during
any contact with soil or sand because
it might contain cat feces. Wash hands
thoroughly after coming in contact with
soil or sand.
• Avoid changing cat litter, if possible. If
you must do it, wear gloves and wash
your hands thoroughly afterward. Change
the litter box daily, keep your cat inside, and
do not handle stray or adopted cats. Do not
feed your cat raw or undercooked meats.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |37Return to Table of Contents
Coping with the physical changes and discomforts
of pregnancy
Your body will be constantly changing during pregnancy, which might cause some
discomforts. These might occur in the early weeks of pregnancy, while others will occur only
as you get closer to delivery. Other discomforts might appear early and then go away, only to
come back later. This is normal and usually does not mean something is wrong.
Some of the most common discomforts and ways to relieve them are described here. Every
woman’s pregnancy is unique, and some of these discomforts might not affect you. Discuss
any concerns with your healthcare provider. Please refer to the “Medicine Guidelines” section
for over-the-counter medications to aid with discomforts of pregnancy.
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Abdominal pain and discomfort
Sharp, shooting pains on either side of your
stomach might result from the stretching
tissue supporting your growing uterus. These
pains might also travel down your thigh and
into your leg.
• Try massage.
• Make sure you are getting enough fluids.
• Try ice.
Round ligament pain
Most common during the second trimester.
Sharp pain in the abdomen or hip area that
is either on one side or both, may extend
to the groin area. Round ligament pain is
considered a normal part of pregnancy.
• Change your position or activity until you are
comfortable. Avoid sharp turns or movements.
• If you have a sudden pain in your abdomen,
bend forward to the point of pain to relieve
tension and relax the tissue.
• Apply a hot water bottle or heating pad, or
take a warm bath or shower.
• Rest.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |38Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Muscle tightening
The muscles in your uterus will contract
(tighten) from about the fourth month of
pregnancy. Irregular, infrequent contractions
are called Braxton Hicks contractions.
Contact your healthcare provider if the pain is
severe or constant or if you are less than 36
weeks pregnant and you have signs of pre-term
labor.
Signs of pre-term (premature) labor:
• More than four to six contractions (tightening
of the muscles in the uterus, which cause
discomfort or a dull ache in the lower
abdomen) in an hour.
• Regular tightening or pain in your back or
lower abdomen.
• Pressure in the pelvis or vagina.
• Menstrual-like cramps.
• Bleeding.
• Fluid leakage.
• Flu-like symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting
and diarrhea.
Backaches
Backaches are usually caused by the strain
put on the back muscles, changing hormone
levels and changes in your posture.
• Wear low-healed (but not flat) shoes.
• Avoid lifting heavy objects.
• Squat down with your knees bent when
picking things up instead of bending down at
the waist.
• Avoid twisting your upper body when lifting.
• Sit in a chair with good back support, or place
a small pillow behind your lower back. Also,
place your feet on a footrest or stool.
• Sleep on your left or right side with a pillow
between your legs for support.
• Apply a hot water bottle or heating pad,
take a warm bath or shower, or try ice
and/or massage.
• Use a supportive mattress and pillows
for sleeping.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |39Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Backaches cont. • Perform exercises, as advised by your
healthcare provider, to make your back
muscles stronger and to help relieve
the soreness.
• See a physical therapist, chiropractor or
participate in a low back and pelvic pain
shared medical appointment (SMA). Your
provider can refer you.
• Maintain good posture. Standing up straight
will ease the strain on your back. Wear a
supportive bra.
• Wear a maternity support belt.
• If you have pain that is mostly on one side
and/or travels down one leg it may be
sciatica. Lying on the opposite side/hip may
help. Also, try ice, heat and/or massage.
• Contact your healthcare provider if you have
a low backache that goes around your
stomach and does not go away within one
hour after you change position or rest. This
might be a sign of premature labor.
Bleeding and swollen gums
The increase in your volume of circulation
and supply of certain hormones might cause
tenderness, swelling and bleeding of gums.
• Take proper care of your teeth and gums.
Brush and floss regularly.
• Get a dental checkup early in your
pregnancy to make sure your teeth and
mouth are healthy. See your dentist if you
have a problem.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |40Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Breast changes
Your breasts may increase in size as your
milk glands enlarge and the fatty tissue
increases. Your breasts are preparing to
produce milk for your baby. Bluish veins
might also appear as your blood supply
increases. Your nipples will also darken and
a thick fluid called colostrum might leak from
your breasts. All of these breast changes are
normal.
• Wear a supportive bra.
• Choose cotton bras or those made from other
natural fibers.
• Increase your bra size as your breasts become
larger. Your bra should fit well without
irritating your nipples. Try maternity or
nursing bras, which provide more support and
can be used after pregnancy.
• Avoid caffeine.
• Tuck a cotton handkerchief or gauze pad into
each bra cup to absorb leaking fluid. Nursing
pads, which you can buy in a pharmacy, are
another option.
• Clean your breasts with warm water only. Do
not use soap or other products.
This is a great time to learn about the benefits
of breastfeeding.
Constipation
Your hormones, as well as vitamins and
iron supplements, might cause constipation
(trouble passing stool, or incomplete or
infrequent passage of hard stools). Pressure
on your rectum from your uterus might also
cause constipation.
• Add more fiber (such as whole grain foods,
fresh fruits and vegetables) to your diet.
• Drink plenty of fluids daily (at least 10 to 12
glasses of water and one to two glasses of
fruit or prune juice).
• Drink warm liquids, especially in the morning.
• Exercise daily.
• Set a regular time for bowel movements.
Avoid straining when having a bowel
movement.
• Refer to the medication list as you may
need to use stool softeners and/or glycerin
suppositories.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |41Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Difficulty sleeping
Finding a comfortable resting position can
become difficult later in pregnancy.
• Don’t take sleep medication on a
frequent basis.
• Get exercise regularly.
• Regulate the temperature in the room you
sleep in as best as you can.
• Avoid caffeine.
• Try drinking warm milk at bedtime.
• Try taking a warm shower or bath
before bedtime.
• Use extra pillows for support while sleeping.
Lying on your side, place a pillow under your
head, abdomen, behind your back, and
between your knees to prevent muscle strain
and help you get the rest you need. You will
probably feel better lying on your left side.
This improves circulation of blood throughout
your body.
Dizziness • Move around often when standing for long
periods of time to avoid locking your knees.
• Turn on your side before rising from a lying
down position.
• Try to move slowly when standing from a
sitting position. Avoid sudden movements.
• If you suddenly feel dizzy, sit and lower your
head or lie down on your side.
Fatigue
Your growing baby requires extra energy,
which might make you feel tired. Sometimes,
feeling tired might be a sign of anemia
(low iron in the blood), which is common
during pregnancy.
• Get plenty of rest. Go to bed early at night
and try taking short naps during the day.
• Avoid caffeine.
• Maintain a regular schedule, when possible,
but pace your activities. Balance activity with
rest when needed.
• Exercise daily to increase your energy level.
• If you think anemia or depression might be
a concern, ask your healthcare provider to test
your blood.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |42Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Frequent urination
During the first trimester, your growing uterus
and growing baby press against your bladder,
causing a frequent need to urinate. This will
happen again when the baby’s head drops
into the pelvis before birth.
• Avoid tight-fitting underwear, pants
or pantyhose.
• Avoid large volumes of fluid in the last hour or
two before bedtime.
• Contact your healthcare provider if your urine
burns or stings. This can be a sign of a
urinary tract infection (UTI) and should be
treated right away.
Headaches
How often headaches occur and how bad
they are can vary.
• Apply an ice pack to your forehead or the
back of your neck.
• Rest, sit or lie quietly in a low-lit room. Close
your eyes and try to release the tension in
your back, neck and shoulders.
• See options for pain relief in the
medication list.
• Contact your healthcare provider if you have
nausea with your headaches; if your
headache is severe and does not go away; or
if you have blurry vision, double vision or
blind spots.
Heartburn or indigestion
Heartburn (indigestion) is a burning feeling
that starts in the stomach and seems to rise
to the throat. It occurs during pregnancy
because your digestive system works more
slowly due to changing hormone levels.
Also, your enlarged uterus can crowd your
stomach, pushing stomach acids upward.
• Eat several small meals each day instead of
three large meals.
• Eat slowly.
• Drink warm liquids such as herbal tea.
• Avoid fried, spicy or rich foods, or any foods
that seem to give you indigestion.
• Don’t lie down directly after eating.
• Keep the head of your bed higher than the
foot of your bed. Or, place pillows under your
shoulders to prevent stomach acids from
rising into your chest.
• See the medication list for antacids you
could try.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |43Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are swollen veins that appear
as painful lumps on the anus. They might
form as a result of increased circulation and
pressure on the rectum and vagina from your
growing baby.
• Try to avoid constipation. Constipation can
cause hemorrhoids and will make them
more painful.
• Try to avoid sitting or standing for long periods
of time. Change your position frequently.
• Make an effort not to strain during a
bowel movement.
• Apply witch hazel pads, ice packs or cold
compresses to the area, or take a warm tub
bath a few times a day to provide relief.
Adding Epsom salts to the bath water
may help.
• Avoid tight-fitting underwear, pants
or pantyhose.
• Discuss the use of a hemorrhoid treatment
with your healthcare provider such as pain
relieving topicals and/or some swelling
reduction items.
Leg cramps
Pressure from your growing uterus can cause
leg cramps or sharp pains down your legs.
• Be sure to eat and drink foods and beverages
rich in calcium (such as milk, broccoli
and cheese).
• Drink fluids with electrolytes, such as
Powerade or Gatorade. However, be aware
that these beverages are high in calories due
to their sugar content.
• Wear comfortable, low-heeled shoes.
• Try wearing support hose but avoid any
legwear that is too tight.
• Elevate your legs when possible. Avoid
crossing your legs.
• Exercise daily.
• Stretch your legs before going to bed.
• Avoid lying on your back, since the weight
of your body and the pressure of your
enlarged uterus can slow the circulation in
your legs, causing cramps.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |44Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Leg cramps cont. • Gently stretch any muscle that becomes
cramped by straightening your leg, flexing
your foot and pulling your toes toward you.
• Try massaging the cramp, or apply heat or a
hot water bottle to the sore area.
Nasal congestion
You might have a stuffy nose or feel like you
have a cold. Pregnancy hormones sometimes
dry out the lining in your nose, making it
inflamed and swollen.
• Apply a warm, wet washcloth to your cheeks,
eyes and nose to reduce congestion.
• Don’t use nose sprays. They can aggravate
your symptoms.
• Drink plenty of fluids (at least 10 to 12
glasses of fluids a day) to thin mucus.
• Elevate your head with an extra pillow while
sleeping to prevent mucus from blocking
your throat.
• Use a humidifier or vaporizer to add moisture
to the air.
Nausea or vomiting
Nausea can occur at any time of the day
but might be worse in the morning when
your stomach is empty (this is often called
“morning sickness”) or if you are not eating
enough.
Nausea is a result of hormonal changes and
most often occurs early in pregnancy until
your body adjusts to the increased production
of hormones.
• If nausea is a problem in the morning, eat dry
foods such as cereal, toast or crackers before
getting out of bed. Try eating a high-protein
snack such as lean meat or cheese before
going to bed. (Protein takes longer to digest).
• Eat small meals or snacks every two to three
hours rather than three large meals. Eat
slowly and chew your food completely.
• Sip on fluids throughout the day. Avoid large
amounts of fluids at one time. Try cool, clear
fruit juices, such as apple or grape juice.
• Avoid spicy, fried or greasy foods.
• If you are bothered by strong smells, eat foods
cold or at room temperature and avoid odors
that bother you.
• To prevent nausea, take vitamin B6 25mg
three times per day and doxylamine 12.5mg
at bedtime. You can also try ginger extract
125 to 250mg every six hours to treat nausea.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |45Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Nausea or vomiting cont. • If you cannot tolerate your prenatal vitamin in
the early part of your pregnancy, you may take
folic acid by itself. Ask your provider.
• Some people notice they have more saliva (or
spit) in their mouths than usual. Hard candy
or gum may help this.
• Wrist bands that apply pressure in certain
spots may helps a well, often called sea bands.
• Contact your healthcare provider if your
vomiting is constant or so severe that you
can’t keep fluids or foods down. This can
cause dehydration and should be treated
right away.
Shortness of breath
You might feel short of breath when walking
up stairs or walking briskly. This is common
due to changes in your body and circulation
during pregnancy.
• Slow down and rest a few moments. Try to
avoid rapid breathing.
• Raise your arms over your head. This lifts
your rib cage and allows you to breathe in
more air.
• Try to breath from your ribs, not your belly.
• Avoid lying flat on your back, and try sleeping
with your head elevated.
Stretch marks
Stretch marks are scars that form when the
skin’s normal elasticity is not enough for the
stretching required during pregnancy. They
usually appear on the abdomen and can also
appear on the breasts, buttocks or thighs.
While they won’t disappear completely,
stretch marks will fade after your child’s
birth. Stretch marks affect the surface under
the skin and are usually not preventable.
• Be sure that your diet contains enough
sources of the nutrients needed for healthy
skin (especially vitamins C and E).
• Apply lotion to your skin to keep it soft and
reduce dryness.
• Exercise daily.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |46Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Swelling in the feet and legs
Pressure from the growing uterus on the
blood vessels carrying blood from the lower
body causes fluid retention that results in
swelling (edema) in the legs and feet.
• Drink plenty of fluids (at least 10 to 12
glasses of fluids a day).
• Exercise regularly.
• Avoid foods high in salt (sodium).
• Elevate your legs and feet while sitting. Avoid
crossing your legs.
• Wear loose, comfortable clothing. Tight
clothing can slow circulation and increase
fluid retention.
• Don’t wear tight shoes. Choose supportive
shoes with low, wide heels and supportive
socks or hose can help.
• Keep your diet rich in protein. Too little
protein can cause fluid retention.
• Notify your healthcare provider if your hands
or face swell. This might be a warning sign of
preeclampsia or toxemia, a pregnancy-related
high blood pressure.
• Rest on your side during the day to help
increase blood flow to your kidneys
Vaginal discharge
Increased blood supply and hormones cause
your vagina to increase normal secretions.
Normal vaginal discharge is white or clear,
non-irritating and, odorless, and might look
yellow when on your underwear or panty
liners.
• Choose cotton underwear or brands made
from other natural fibers.
• Avoid tight-fitting jeans or pants.
• Do not douche. It is possible you can
introduce air into your circulatory system or
break your bag of waters in later pregnancy.
• Avoid femine sprays or deodorants.
• Clean the vaginal area with a mild/unscented
soap or just plain water.
• Wipe yourself from front to back.
• Contact your healthcare provider if you have
burning, itching, irritation or swelling; bad
odor; bloody discharge; or bright yellow or
green discharge. These symptoms could be a
sign of infection.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |47Return to Table of Contents
DISCOMFORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Varicose veins
An increased volume of blood and the
pressure of your growing uterus can slow
your circulation, sometimes causing the veins
in your legs to become larger or swollen.
Although varicose veins are usually hereditary,
here are some preventive tips:
• Avoid standing or sitting in one place for
long periods. It’s important to get up and
move around often.
• Avoid remaining in any position that might
restrict the circulation in your legs (such as
crossing your legs while sitting).
• Elevate your legs and feet while sitting.
• Exercise regularly.
• Wear support stockings but avoid any leg
wear that is too tight; knee high or waist high
is best. Avoid thigh-high legwear.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |48Return to Table of Contents
Finding a Comfortable Position: Correct Posture and
Body Mechanics During Pregnancy
What is good posture?
Posture is the position in which you hold your
body while standing, sitting or lying down.
Good posture during pregnancy involves
training your body to stand, walk, sit and lie
in positions where the least strain is placed on
your back.
What is the correct way to stand?
1. Hold your head up straight with your chin
in. Do not tilt your head forward, backward
or sideways.
2. Make sure your ear lobes are in line with the
middle of your shoulders.
3. Keep your shoulder blades back and your
chest forward.
4. Keep your knees straight, but not locked.
5. Stretch the top of your head toward
the ceiling.
6. Tighten your stomach, pulling it in and up
when you are able. Do not tilt your pelvis
forward or backward. Keep your buttocks
tucked in when you are able.
7. Point your feet in the same direction,
with your weight balanced evenly on
both feet. The arches of your feet should
be supported with low-heeled (but not
flat) shoes.
8. Avoid standing in the same position for a
long time.
9. If you need to stand for long periods,
adjust the height of the work table to a
comfortable level if possible. Try to elevate
one foot by resting it on a stool or box.
After several minutes, switch your
foot position.
10. While working in the kitchen, open the
cabinet under the sink and rest one foot
on the inside of the cabinet. Change feet
every five to 15 minutes.
What is the correct way to sit?
1. Sit up with your back straight and your
shoulders back. Your buttocks should
touch the back of your chair.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |49Return to Table of Contents
2. Sit with a back support (such as a small,
rolled-up towel or a lumbar roll) placed at
the hollow of your back. Here’s how to find
a good sitting position when you’re not using
a back support or lumbar roll:
• Sit at the end of your chair and
slouch completely.
• Draw yourself up and accentuate the curve
of your back as far as possible.
• Hold for a few seconds.
• Release the position slightly (about
10 degrees).
3. Distribute your body weight evenly on
both hips.
4. Keep your hips and knees at 90 degree
angle. Use a foot rest or stool if necessary.
Your legs should not be crossed and your
feet should be flat on the floor.
Correct sitting position without lumbar support
(left) and with lumbar support (right).
It is OK to assume other sitting positions
for short periods of time, but most of
your sitting time should be spent as
described above so there is minimal
stress on your back. If you have back
pain, sit as little as possible, and only for
short periods of time (10 to 15 minutes).
5. Try to avoid sitting in the same position for
more than 30 minutes.
6. At work, adjust your chair height and work
station so you can sit up close to your work
and tilt it up at you. Rest your elbows and
arms on your chair or desk, keeping your
shoulders relaxed.
7. When sitting in a chair that rolls and
pivots, don’t twist at the waist while sitting.
Instead, turn your whole body.
8. When standing up from the sitting position,
move to the front of the seat of your chair.
Stand up by straightening your legs. Avoid
bending forward at your waist. Immediately
stretch your back by doing 10 standing
backbends.
What is the correct driving position
1. Use a back support (lumbar roll) at the
curve of your back. Your knees should be at
the same level as your hips.
2. Move the seat close to the steering wheel
to support the curve of your back. The seat
should be close enough to allow your knees
to bend and your feet to reach the pedals.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |50Return to Table of Contents
3. Always wear both the lap and shoulder
safety belts. Place the lap belt under
your abdomen, as low on your hips as
possible and across your upper thighs.
Never place the belt above your abdomen.
Place the shoulder belt between your
breasts. Adjust the shoulder and lap belts
as snug as possible.
4. If your vehicle is equipped with an air bag,
it is very important to wear your shoulder
and lapbelts. In addition, always sit back
at least 10 inches away from the site where
the air bag is stored. On the driver’s side,
the air bag is located in the steering wheel.
When driving, pregnant women should
adjust the steering wheel so it is tilted
toward the chest and away from the
head and abdomen.
What is the correct way to lift objects?
1. If you must lift objects, do not try to lift
objects that are awkward or are heavier than
20 pounds.
2. Before you lift an object, make sure you
have firm footing.
3. To pick up an object that is lower than
the level of your waist, keep your back
straight and bend at your knees and hips.
Do not bend forward at the waist with
your knees straight.
Correct Incorrect
4. Stand with a wide stance close to the
object you are trying to pick up, and keep
your feet firmly on the ground. Tighten
your stomach muscles along with your
pelvic floor muscles (Kegel) and lift the
object using your leg muscles. Straighten
your knees in a steady motion. Don’t jerk
the object up to your body.
5. Stand completely upright without twisting.
Always move your feet forward when lifting
an object.
6. If you are lifting an object from a table,
slide it to the edge of the table so you can
hold it close to your body. Bend your knees
so you are close to the object. Use your
legs to lift the object and come to a
standing position.
7. Avoid lifting heavy objects above waist level.
8. Hold packages close to your body with your
arms bent. Keep your stomach muscles
tight. Take small steps and go slowly.
9. To lower the object, place your feet as you
did to lift. Tighten your stomach muscles,
and bend your hips and knees.
Reaching objects overhead
1. Use a foot stool or chair to bring yourself up
to the level of what you are reaching.
2. Get your body as close as possible to the
object you need to reach.
3. Make sure you have a good idea of how
heavy the object is you are going to lift.
4. Use two hands to lift.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |51Return to Table of Contents
What is the best position for sleeping and
lying down?
The best lying or sleeping position might vary.
No matter in what position you lie, place a
pillow under your head, but not your shoulders.
The pillow should be a thickness that allows
your head to be in a normal position to avoid
straining your back. You might also want to put
a pillow between your legs for support.
• Try to sleep in a position that helps you
maintain the curve in your back (such as on
your side with your knees slightly bent, with
a pillow between your knees). Do not sleep
on your side with your knees drawn up to
your chest. Avoid sleeping on your stomach.
• Select a firm mattress and box spring set
that does not sag. If necessary, place a
board under your mattress. You can also
place the mattress on the floor temporarily if
necessary. If you have always slept on a soft
surface, it might be more painful to change
to a hard surface.
Try to do what is most comfortable for you.
• Try using a back support (lumbar support)
at night to make you more comfortable. A
rolled sheet or towel tied around your waist
might be helpful.
• If sleeping on your back is preferred, use a
thin pillow under one side so that you are
tipped slightly to one side. This will help
you not become dizzy, short of breath or
nausesated from being flat on your back
by keeping your blood flowing normally
in your belly.
• When standing up from the lying position,
turn on your side, draw up both knees
towards your chest and let your legs gently
drop off the bed. Sit up by pushing yourself
up with your hands. Avoid bending forward
at your waist.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |52Return to Table of Contents
Exercise During Pregnancy
A regular exercise routine throughout your
pregnancy can help you stay healthy and
feeling your best.
How can I stay fit?
Regular exercise during pregnancy can improve
your posture and decrease some common
discomforts such as backaches, constipation,
bloating, swelling and fatigue. Exercise can
also improve mood and assist with sleep.
Being fit during pregnancy means safe, mild to
moderate exercise at least three times a week,
unless you have been otherwise advised by
your physician.
If you were physically active before your
pregnancy, you should be able to continue your
activity in moderation. Don’t try to exercise
at your former level. Instead, do what’s most
comfortable for you now. Stay within 70% of
your target heart rate (target heart rate can be
measured at 220 minus your current age).
If you have never exercised regularly before,
you can safely begin an exercise program
during pregnancy after consulting with your
healthcare provider. If you did not exercise
three times a week before getting pregnant,
do not try a new, strenuous activity. Start
with a low-intensity activity and gradually
move to a higher activity level.
Is exercise safe for everyone?
Every pregnant woman should consult with
her healthcare provider before beginning an
exercise program. Your healthcare provider can
give you personal exercise guidelines, based on
your medical history.
If you have a medical problem, such as
asthma, heart or lung disease, or high blood
pressure, exercise might not be advisable for
you. Exercise might also be harmful if you have
an obstetric condition such as:
• Carrying more than one baby.
• Vaginal bleeding or spotting.
• Low placenta.
• Weak cervix.
• Threatened or recurrent miscarriage.
• Premature ruptured membranes.
• Previous premature births or history of
early labor.
• Serious heart or lung disease.
• High blood pressure.
What exercises are safe?
Most exercises are safe to perform during
pregnancy, as long as you exercise with caution
and you do not overdo it.
The safest and most productive activities are
swimming, brisk walking, indoor stationary
cycling, prenatal yoga and low-impact
aerobics (taught by a certified aerobics
instructor). These activities carry little risk of
injury, benefit your entire body and can be
continued until birth.
Other activities such as jogging can be done
in moderation. You might want to choose
exercises or activities that do not require
great balance or coordination, especially
later in pregnancy.
Exercises to avoid
There are certain exercises and activities that
can be harmful if performed during pregnancy.
Avoid:
• Holding your breath during any activity.
• Activities during which falling is likely (such
as skiing, gymnastics and horseback riding).
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |53Return to Table of Contents
• Contact sports such as hockey, softball,
football, basketball and volleyball (to
reduce your risk of injury).
• Any exercise that might cause even mild
abdominal trauma such as activities that
include jarring motions or rapid changes
in direction.
• Activities that require extensive jumping,
hopping, skipping, bouncing or running.
• Deep knee bends, full sit-ups, double leg
raises and straight-leg toe touches.
• Bouncing while stretching (bounce
stretching is unsafe for everyone).
• Exercises that require lying on your
back or right side for more than three
minutes (especially after your third month
of pregnancy).
• Waist-twisting movements while standing.
• Heavy exercise spurts followed by long
periods of inactivity.
• Heavy lifting over 50 pounds.
• Exercise in hot, humid weather (if at all
possible), or high altitudes.
• Hot tubs, saunas and steam rooms.
• Scuba diving.
What should an exercise program include?
For total fitness, an exercise program should
strengthen and condition your muscles.
Always begin by warming up for five minutes
and stretching for five minutes. Include at least
15 minutes of cardiovascular activity. Measure
your heart rate at times of peak activity. Your
heart rate might range from 140 to 160 beats
per minute during activity. Follow aerobic
activity with five to 10 minutes of gradually
slower exercise that ends with gentle stretching.
Basic exercise guidelines:
• Wear loose-fitting, comfortable clothes, as
well as a good support bra.
• Choose shoes that are designed for your
type of exercise. Proper shoes are your best
protection against injury.
• Exercise on a flat, level surface to
prevent injury.
• Consume enough calories to meet the needs
of your pregnancy (300 more calories per
day than before you were pregnant), as well
as your exercise program.
• Finish eating at least one hour
before exercising.
• Drink water before, during and after
your workout.
• After doing floor exercises, get up slowly and
gradually to prevent dizziness.
• Never exercise to the point of exhaustion. If
you cannot talk normally while exercising,
you are probably over exerting yourself, and
you should slow down your activity.
Stop exercising and consult your
healthcare provider if you:
• Feel pain.
• Have abdominal, chest or pelvic pain.
• Notice an absence of fetal movement.
• Feel faint, dizzy, nauseous or light-headed.
• Feel cold or clammy.
• Have vaginal bleeding.
• Have a sudden gush of fluid from the vagina
or a trickle of fluid that leaks steadily (when
your bag of “water” breaks, also called
rupture of the amniotic membrane).
• Notice an irregular or rapid heartbeat.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |54Return to Table of Contents
• Have a sudden swelling in your ankles,
hands, face or experience calf pain.
• Have increased shortness of breath.
• Have persistent contractions that continue
after rest before 37 weeks
• Have difficulty walking.
• Your baby is not as active as usual.
What physical changes might affect my
ability to exercise?
Physical changes during pregnancy create extra
demands on your body. Keeping in mind the
changes listed here, remember that you need
to listen to your body and adjust your activities
or exercise routine as necessary.
• Your developing baby and other internal
changes require more oxygen and energy.
• Hormones produced during pregnancy cause
the ligaments that support your joints to
stretch, increasing the risk of injury.
• The extra weight and the uneven distribution
of your weight changes your center of
gravity. The extra weight also puts stress on
joints and muscles in the lower back and
pelvic area, makes it easier for you to lose
your balance.
How soon can I exercise after delivery?
It is best to ask your healthcare provider how
soon you can begin your exercise routine after
delivering your baby.
Although you might be eager to get in shape
quickly, return to your pre-pregnancy fitness
routines gradually. Follow your healthcare
provider’s exercise recommendations.
Most women can safely perform a low-impact
activity one to two weeks after a vaginal
birth (three to four weeks after a cesarean
birth). Do about half of your normal floor
exercises and don’t try to overdo it. Wait until
about six weeks after birth before running or
participating in other high-impact activities.
Listed here are some basic stretching and
toning exercises for pregnant women.
Remember: Before you start any exercise
program, consult with your healthcare
provider. Your healthcare provider can give
you personal exercise guidelines, based on
your medical history.
Stretching Exercises
Stretching makes the muscles limber and
warm. Here are some simple stretches you can
perform before or after exercise.
• Neck rotation: Relax your neck and
shoulders. Drop your head forward. Slowly
rotate your head to your right shoulder,
then back to the middle and over the left
shoulder. Complete four, slow rotations in
each direction.
• Shoulder rotation: Bring your shoulders
forward, then rotate them up toward your
ears, then back down. Do four rotations in
each direction.
• Swim: Place your arms at your sides.
Bring your right arm up and extend your
body forward and twist to the side, as if
swimming the crawl stroke. Follow with your
left arm. Do the sequence 10 times.
• Thigh shift: Stand with one foot about two
feet in front of the other, toes pointed in the
same direction. Lean forward, supporting
your weight on the forward thigh. Change
sides and repeat. Do four on each side.
• Leg shake: Sit with your legs and feet
extended. Move the legs up and down in a
gentle shaking motion.
• Ankle rotation: Sit with your legs extended
and keep your toes relaxed. Rotate your feet,
making large circles. Use your whole foot
and ankle. Rotate four times on the right
and four times on the left.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |55Return to Table of Contents
Muscle Toning Exercises
The following exercises can be done to
strengthen the muscles of your vagina,
abdomen, pelvic floor, back and thighs.
Pelvic tilt
Pelvic tilts strengthen the muscles of the
abdomen and lower back, increase hip
mobility, and help relieve low back pain
during pregnancy and labor.
• All fours: On the floor, get on your hands
and knees, keeping your hands in line with
your shoulders and your knees in line with
your hips. Keep your back flat and shoulders
relaxed. Inhale. While tightening your
abdomen, tuck your buttocks under and tilt
your pelvis forward in one motion. Exhale.
Relax, being careful not to let your back sag.
Continue to breathe. Repeat 10 times.
• Standing: Stand with your feet about 10
inches apart, legs relaxed and knees slightly
bent. Place your hands on your hips. Inhale.
While tightening your abdomen, tuck your
buttocks under and tilt your pelvis forward
in one motion. Exhale and relax. Repeat
10 times.
Tailor exercises
• Tailor exercises: Strengthen the pelvic, hip,
and thigh muscles, and can help relieve low
back pain.
• Tailor sit: Sit with your knees bent and
ankles crossed. (See illustration 3a) Lean
slightly forward. Keep your back straight
but relaxed. (See illustration 3b) Use this
position whenever possible throughout
the day.
3a 3b
• Tailor press: Sit with your knees bent and
the soles of your feet together. Grasp your
ankles and pull your feet gently toward your
body. Place your hands under your knees.
Inhale. While pressing your knees down
against your hands, press your hands up
against your knees (counter- pressure).
Hold for a count of five.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |56Return to Table of Contents
Kegel exercises
Kegel exercises, also called pelvic floor
exercises, help strengthen the muscles that
support the bladder, uterus and bowels.
By strengthening these muscles during
pregnancy, you can develop the ability to relax
and control the muscles in preparation for
labor and birth.
Kegel exercises are highly recommended during
the postpartum period to promote the healing
of perineal tissues, increase the strength of the
pelvic floor muscles, and help these muscles
return to a healthy state, including increased
urinary control.
How to do Kegel exercises
Imagine you are trying to stop the flow of urine
or trying to not pass gas. When you do this,
you are contracting the muscles of the pelvic
floor and are practicing Kegel exercises. While
doing Kegel exercises, try not to move your
leg, buttock, or abdominal muscles. In fact,
no one should be able to tell you are doing
Kegel exercises.
How often should I do Kegel exercises?
Kegel exercises should be done every day. We
recommend doing three sets of Kegel exercises
a day. Each time you contract the muscles of
the pelvic floor, hold for a slow count of 10
seconds and then relax. Repeat this 15 times
for one set of Kegels.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |57Return to Table of Contents
Pregnancy, Childbirth and Bladder Control
Many women experience urine leakage, which
is also called incontinence, during pregnancy
or after they have given birth.
The bladder is a round, muscular organ that is
located above the pelvic bones. It is supported
by the pelvic muscles. A tube called the
urethra allows urine to flow out of the bladder.
The bladder muscle relaxes as the bladder fills
with urine, while the sphincter muscles help
to keep the bladder closed until you are ready
to urinate.
Sphincters
Bladder
Muscle
wall of
bladder
Urethra
Ureter
2012
CCF
There are other systems of the body that help
to control the bladder. Nerves from the bladder
send signals to the brain when the bladder
is full, and nerves from the brain signal the
bladder when it needs to be emptied. All of
these nerves and muscles must work together
so the bladder can function normally.
How do pregnancy and childbirth affect
bladder control?
During pregnancy, you may leak urine between
trips to the bathroom. This type of leakage is
called stress incontinence, due to the pressure
that the unborn baby places on the pelvic floor
muscles, the bladder and the urethra.
The extra pressure can make you feel the urge
to urinate more often. Stress incontinence may
be only temporary and often ends within a few
weeks after the baby is born.
Bladder
compression
Pelvic floor
movement
Bladder
Urinary
sphincters
Pelvic floor
muscles
2012
CCF
Pregnancy, the type of delivery and the number
of children a woman has are factors that can
increase the risk of incontinence. Women who
have given birth, whether by vaginal delivery
or cesarean section, have much higher rates of
stress incontinence than those who never have
had a baby.
Loss of bladder control may be caused by
pelvic organ prolapse that sometimes occurs
after childbirth. The pelvic muscles can stretch
and become weaker during pregnancy or
vaginal delivery. If the pelvic muscles do not
provide adequate support, your bladder may
sag or droop. This condition is known as a
cystocele. When the bladder sags, it can cause
the urethra’s opening to stretch.
Pelvic nerves that regulate bladder function
may be injured during a long or difficult vaginal
delivery. Delivery with forceps can result in
injuries to the pelvic floor and anal sphincter
muscles. Prolonged pushing during a vaginal
delivery also increases the likelihood of injury
to the pelvic nerves and subsequent bladder
control problems.
How are bladder control problems
diagnosed?
Although most problems with bladder control
during or after pregnancy disappear over time,
you should visit your doctor if they persist for
six weeks or more after you have given birth.
It is a good idea to keep a diary to record
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |58Return to Table of Contents
your trips to the bathroom, how often you
experience urine leakage, and when it occurs.
The doctor will perform a physical examination
to rule out various medical conditions and
see how well your bladder is functioning.
Your doctor may order various tests, which
might include:
• Urinalysis: You will be asked to provide a
urine sample to be analyzed for possible
infections that could cause incontinence.
• Ultrasound: Images produced by ultrasound
waves can show the kidneys, bladder
and urethra.
• Bladder stress test: Your doctor will check
for signs of urine leakage when you cough
forcefully or bear down.
• Cytoscopy: A thin tube with a miniature
camera at one end is inserted into the
urethra so the doctor can examine your
bladder and urethra.
• Urodynamics: A thin tube is inserted
into the bladder to fill it with water so
the pressure inside the bladder can
be measured.
How are bladder control problems
treated?
There are several techniques for treating
bladder control problems. Practicing Kegel
exercises may help to improve bladder control
and reduce urine leakage.
In addition, changing your diet, losing
weight, and timing your trips to the bathroom
may help.
Drinking beverages such as carbonated drinks,
coffee and tea might make you feel like you
need to urinate more often. Switching to
decaffeinated beverages or water can help to
prevent urine leakage. Limit your consumption
of fluids after dinner to reduce the number of
trips to the bathroom during the night. You
should consume foods high in fiber to avoid
being constipated, since constipation may also
result in urine leakage.
Excess body weight can put additional pressure
on the bladder. Losing weight after your baby is
born can help to relieve some of the pressure.
Keeping a record of the times during the day
when you are most likely to experience urine
leakage, you may be able to avoid leakage by
planning trips to the bathroom ahead of time.
After you have established a regular pattern,
you might be able to extend the time between
trips to the bathroom. By making yourself
hold on longer, you will strengthen your pelvic
muscles and increase control over
your bladder.
Additionally, pelvic floor strengthening can
be accomplished with the help of a physical
therapist, so talk to your provider about this
option.
How can loss of bladder control due to
pregnancy or childbirth be prevented?
Labor and vaginal delivery have an impact on
the pelvic floor muscles and nerves that affect
bladder control, so you should discuss your
options with your healthcare provider.
Cesarean sections are associated with a lower
risk of incontinence or pelvic prolapse than
vaginal deliveries, but they may present other
risks. Large babies who weigh more than nine
pounds at birth may increase the risk of nerve
damage during delivery.
Exercising pelvic floor muscles with Kegel
exercises can help prevent bladder control
problems. Bladder control problems might
show up months to years after childbirth.
Talk to your healthcare team if this happens
to you.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |59Return to Table of Contents
Sex During Pregnancy
Can I have sex during pregnancy without
harming my baby?
Yes. There is no reason to change or alter your
sexual activity during pregnancy unless your
healthcare provider advises otherwise.
Intercourse or orgasm during pregnancy will
not harm your baby, unless you have a medical
problem. Remember that your baby is well
protected in your uterus by the amniotic fluid
that surrounds him or her.
Your healthcare provider might recommend
not having intercourse early in pregnancy if
you have a history of miscarriages. Intercourse
might also be restricted if you have certain
complications of pregnancy, such as pre-term
labor or bleeding. You might need to ask your
healthcare provider to clarify if this means no
penetration, no orgasms, or no sexual arousal,
as different complications might require
different restrictions.
Comfort during intercourse
As your pregnancy progresses, changing
positions might become necessary for your
comfort. This might also be true after your
baby is born.
A water-based lubricant may be used during
intercourse if necessary.
During intercourse, you should not feel pain.
During orgasm, your uterus will contract which
may be mildly uncomfortable. It is common to
have vaginal spotting (blood) after intercourse.
Call your healthcare provider immediately if
you have heavy vaginal bleeding, persistent
pain, or if your water breaks. Nothing should
enter the vagina after your water breaks.
Communicate with your partner
Talk to your partner. Tell your partner how
you feel, especially if you have mixed feelings
about sex during pregnancy. Encourage your
partner to communicate with you, especially
if you notice changes in your partner’s
responsiveness. Communicating with your
partner can help you both better understand
your feelings and desires.
Will my desires change?
It is common for your desires to be different
now that you are pregnant. Changing
hormones cause some women to experience
an increased sex drive during pregnancy, while
others might not be as interested in sex as they
were before they became pregnant.
Take time for intimacy
If your healthcare provider has limited your
sexual activity, or if you are not in the mood
for intercourse, remember to take time for
intimacy with your partner. Being intimate
does not require having intercourse. Love and
affection can be expressed in many ways.
Removing because there are a number of
situations in which this is just not applicable.
How soon can I have sex after my baby
is born?
In general, you can resume sexual activity
when you have recovered, when your bleeding
has stopped, and when you and your partner
feel comfortable.
Your healthcare provider might recommend
that you wait until after your first postpartum
healthcare appointment before having
intercourse with your partner.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |60Return to Table of Contents
After pregnancy, some women notice a lack of
vaginal lubrication during intercourse.
A water-based lubricant may be used during
intercourse to decrease the discomfort of
vaginal dryness.
Women who only feed their baby breast milk
experience a delay in ovulation (when an egg
is released from the ovary) and menstruation.
However, ovulation will occur before you start
having menstrual periods again, so remember
that you can still become pregnant during
this time. Follow your healthcare provider’s
recommendations on the appropriate method
of birth control to use.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |61Return to Table of Contents
Sleep During Pregnancy
The hormonal changes and physical
discomfort associated with pregnancy can
affect quality of sleep. Each trimester brings
its own unique changes, including changes
in sleep.
The National Sleep Foundation offers the
following most common reasons why sleep
patterns change throughout your pregnancy:
• You might wake more frequently to empty
your bladder.
• Heartburn, nausea, leg cramps and sinus
congestion may be problems.
• Physical and emotional changes are
occurring in your life.
• You might feel very sleepy during some
periods of the day as a result of disturbed
sleep, and as a side effect of increased
levels of the hormone progesterone.
• You might feel uncomfortable in general
as your belly increases in size and your
weight increases.
Getting enough sleep during pregnancy
If your sleep disturbances are severe, do not
hesitate to ask your doctor to help you find
solutions that will work for you. One or more of
the following might help you get the sleep you
need during pregnancy:
• Pillows: Pillows can be used to support both
the abdomen and back.
A pillow between the legs can help support
the lower back and make sleeping on your
side easier. Some specific types of pillows
include the wedge-shaped pillow, full-length
body pillow, and U shaped pillow. It is
recommended to sleep on your side.
• Nutrition: Drinking a glass of warm milk
might help bring on sleep. Foods high in
carbohydrates, such as a small bowl of
dry cereal with a small four-ounce cup of
milk, a slice of toast, bread or crackers,
can promote sleep because they increase
the level of sleep-inducing tryptophan. A
snack high in protein (like one teaspoon
of peanut butter or a low-fat cheese slice
with whole grain crackers) can keep blood
sugar levels up, and could help prevent bad
dreams, headaches, and hot flashes. Avoid
foods containing caffeine such as coffee,
tea, caffeine-containing soft drinks and
chocolate.
• Relaxation techniques: Relaxation
techniques can help calm your mind and
relax your muscles. These techniques
include stretching and yoga, massage and
deep breathing.
• Exercise: Regular exercise during pregnancy
promotes your physical and mental health.
Exercise also can aid in helping you sleep
more deeply. Vigorous exercise within four
hours of bedtime should be avoided.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |62Return to Table of Contents
Travel during pregnancy
Can I travel while I’m pregnant?
Yes, you can travel when you’re pregnant.
However, just like many other aspects of
pregnancy, you will need to plan ahead before
hitting the road. There are few things you
will want to take into consideration before
traveling, including:
• How far along you are in your pregnancy:
There actually is an ideal time to travel
during your pregnancy—the second
trimester. For many women, the first
trimester is dominated by morning sickness
and discomfort as your body adjusts to
the pregnancy. The third trimester is also
generally more uncomfortable and you will
want to be close to your healthcare provider
as your due date approaches. The second
trimester, however, is typically the time
when you feel best during a pregnancy.
The risks of complications are lowest
during this stretch of time and the nausea
from your first few months of pregnancy
has typically faded.
• If you have any medical conditions: Before
traveling, you should talk to your healthcare
provider and discuss any medical conditions
you may have. You may need to adapt
your travel plans if you have a medical
condition like high blood pressure, anemia
or gestational diabetes. This could include
planning to stand up to stretch your legs
every few hours or wearing compression
stockings. Your provider may also suggest
that you bring a copy of your medical
records with you in case you need treatment
while away from home. Look at medical
centers and hospitals near your destination
and know how to get to them in case of
an emergency.
• How many babies you are carrying: If you
are carrying multiple babies, the risk of
delivering early goes up. Your provider may
suggest that you stay closer to home if you
are pregnant with multiple babies. Talk to
your healthcare provider about the best time
to travel during a pregnancy with multiples.
• Possible outbreaks of illness or disease at
your destination: Check your destination
to see if there are any actively spreading
diseases. Some diseases, such as the Zika
virus, can harm both you and your baby if
you are infected while you are pregnant.
If you need to travel somewhere that’s
experiencing an outbreak, make sure you
talk to your healthcare provider about ways
to prevent getting sick.
During pregnancy, you can travel by a variety
of methods—including cars, trains, airplanes,
buses and cruise ships. No matter how you
travel, you need to modify your habits while
traveling to stay healthy. If you will be sitting
for a long period of time, you’ll need to stretch
your legs. This could mean stopping the car
for stretching breaks and walking around for a
few minutes. Or it could be getting out of your
seat on a plane or train. In those cases, try and
book an aisle seat so that it’s easier to get up.
Just make sure you have a solid footing when
walking around on a moving train or plane. You
want to avoid falls.
Getting up and moving around during travel
can help prevent a condition called deep vein
thrombosis from developing. This condition
happens when blood clots form and travel
throughout your body. Your risk of developing
blood clots is higher during pregnancy.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |63Return to Table of Contents
Is it safe to fly while pregnant?
You can safely fly in an airplane during
pregnancy. On longer flights, you may need to
get up to stretch your legs to avoid blood clots.
Talk to your healthcare provider before leaving
for your trip to make sure there are no medical
conditions that could cause a complication
during your flight.
At what point during pregnancy can I no
longer fly in an airplane?
Each airline will have its own policy about
when in a pregnancy you can no longer fly.
Make sure you look at the guidelines for your
particular airline before booking a flight. In
general, most airlines don’t allow you to fly
in your last month of pregnancy. Some limit
your travel even as early as 28 or 29 weeks
of pregnancy. You may also want to call the
airline to make sure you’ll be able to fly. Some
international flights may have an earlier cutoff
for pregnant passengers than domestic flights.
When do I need to stop traveling?
The closer you get to your due date, the
closer you will want to stay to home and your
healthcare provider. Remember, your due
date is an estimate. The end of pregnancy
can be a bit unpredictable and you can go
into labor at any time in the last few weeks.
Most healthcare providers recommend
that you stay closer to home in the third
trimester, and especially in the last month of
pregnancy. If you need to travel at the end of
your pregnancy, you will want to plan ahead
and know locations of hospitals and medical
centers near your destination.
You may also need to stop traveling if there is
a complication during your pregnancy. If you
develop a condition that needs to be closely
monitored by your provider, like preeclampsia,
you will want to avoid long trips. You may also
be asked to not travel long distances a little
earlier in your pregnancy if you are carrying
multiple babies.
Do I need vaccinations if I’m traveling
during pregnancy?
Some vaccines are not recommended for
during pregnancy. These include live vaccines
like the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella).
Others, like the influenza vaccine, are
considered safe during pregnancy.If you are
traveling to an area where you would typically
receive vaccinations to protect yourself from
disease, talk to your healthcare provider
about the risks and benefits of receiving the
vaccination. Sometimes, the risk of getting sick
is greater than any side effects of the vaccine.
In those cases, your healthcare provider may
give you the vaccine during pregnancy.
What’s Zika and should I worry about it
when traveling?
The Zika virus can be spread by a direct
mosquito bite as well as through sex. Typically
found in tropical regions—like South America,
Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean—
this virus has been linked to microcephaly. This
is a serious birth defect where a baby’s brain
doesn’t fully develop before birth, shortening
the child’s life expectancy.
If you need to travel to a region with active
Zika during your pregnancy, talk to your
healthcare provider first. During your trip, it
will be important to avoid mosquito bites. A
few tips your healthcare provider may suggest
to avoid mosquito bites include:
• Using an insect repellent (one containing
DEET is safe for pregnant women and can
help prevent mosquito bites).
• Covering any exposed skin.
• Wearing light colored clothing.
• Avoiding standing water (mosquitoes breed
in still water).
• Using mosquito nets over your bed and
having screens on windows and doors.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |64Return to Table of Contents
Zika can also be passed between couples
during sex. It’s important to use a condom if
you or your partner have been exposed to Zika.
The virus typically leaves your body in about
six months.
What happens if I get sick or go into
labor while I’m traveling?
You should always be prepared for a medical
emergency when you’re traveling during
pregnancy. There are a few safety precautions
that you should follow just in case something
happens.
• Bring your medical records with you when
you travel: If you have a medical emergency
or need treatment of any kind when you’re
far from home, these records will ensure
that you get the right care. The entire
history of your pregnancy and any pre-
existing conditions that you may have will
all be included in these documents.
• Know where you can receive care: No
matter how you are traveling or where you
are going, it’s important to know where you
could receive care if you needed it. If you
are on a cruise ship, ask about the onboard
medical care and what’s available at the
ports where your ship will stop. Look at your
stops on long road trips or air travel to see
where hospitals or medical centers are along
your route. This planning can be very helpful
if you do experience an emergency and need
to find care quickly.
• Communicate with your health insurance:
Check in with your health insurance before
you travel so that you know what coverage
you have in what locations. In some cases,
like international travel, you may need to
purchase insurance just for your trip.
What other things should I know when
I’m traveling during pregnancy?
When you’re traveling, there are few tips that
you can follow that will help keep you healthy
and safe. These include:
• Drinking bottled water and not adding ice to
your drinks.
• Following nutrition guidelines, including
avoiding food from street vendors and not
eating raw fish.
• Always wearing a seat belt. It should be
fastened across your hips (under your belly)
and the shoulder belt should go across your
body and between your breasts.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |65Return to Table of Contents
Depression During Pregnancy
Pregnancy has long been viewed as a period of
well-being that is protected against psychiatric
disorders. But depression happens almost as
commonly in pregnant women as it does in
non-pregnant women.
If you have had any of the following symptoms,
please notify your healthcare provider right
away:
• Having recurrent thoughts of death
or suicide.
• Having a depressed mood for most of the
day, nearly every day for the last two weeks.
• Feeling guilty, hopeless or worthless.
• Having difficulty thinking, concentrating or
making decisions.
• Losing interest or pleasure in most of the
activities during the day nearly every day for
the last two weeks.
If you do have any of the above symptoms your
healthcare provider may ask you the following
two questions:
1. Over the past two weeks, have you felt
down, depressed or hopeless?
2. Over the past two weeks, have you felt little
interest or pleasure in doing things?
If you answer yes to either of these questions,
your healthcare provider will administer a more
in-depth depression screening.
What is the impact of depression on
pregnancy?
• Depression can interfere with a woman’s
ability to care for herself and her family
during pregnancy. You might be less able to
follow medical recommendations, and sleep
and eat properly.
• Depression can put you at risk for increased
use of substances that have a negative
impact on pregnancy (tobacco, alcohol,
illegal drugs).
Depression might interfere with your ability
to bond with your growing baby. A baby in
the womb is able to recognize the mother’s
voice and sense emotion by pitch, rhythm and
stress. Pregnant people with depression might
find it difficult to develop this bond and instead
might feel emotionally isolated.
How does pregnancy affect depression?
• The stresses of pregnancy can cause
depression or a recurrence or worsening of
depression symptoms.
• Depression during pregnancy can place you
at risk for having an episode of depression
after delivery (postpartum depression).
So what are my options if I’m depressed
during my pregnancy?
• Preparing for a new baby is lots of hard
work, but your health should come first. So
resist the urge to get everything done. Cut
down on your chores and do things that will
help you relax. And remember, taking care
of yourself is an essential part of taking care
of your unborn child.
• Talking about your concerns is very
important. Talk to your friends, your partner
and your family. If you ask for support, you’ll
find that you often get it.
If you are not finding relief from anxiety and
depression by making these changes, seek
your doctor’s advice or a referral to a mental
health professional.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |66Return to Table of Contents
› Your first trimester of pregnancy
› When to call your provider
› Prenatal ultrasonography
› Ultrasound appointment guidelines
› Screening for chromosome abnormalities
› CPT codes for genetic tests
2. First Trimester
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |67Return to Table of Contents
Your First Trimester of Pregnancy
First trimester (Weeks 1 through 12)
The first trimester will span from conception to
12 weeks. During this trimester, your baby will
change from a small grouping of cells to a fetus
that is starting to have a baby’s features.
Month 1 (Weeks 1 through 4)
As the fertilized egg grows, a water-tight sac
forms around it, gradually filling with fluid.
This is called the amniotic sac, and it helps
cushion the growing embryo.
During this time, the placenta also develops.
The placenta is a round, flat organ that
transfers nutrients from the mother to the baby,
and transfers wastes from the baby. Think of
the placenta as a food source for your baby
throughout the pregnancy.
In these first few weeks, a primitive face will
take form with large dark circles for eyes. The
mouth, lower jaw and throat are developing.
Blood cells are taking shape, and circulation
will begin. The tiny “heart” tube will beat 65
times a minute by the end of the fourth week.
By the end of the first month, your baby is
about 1/4 inch long – smaller than a grain
of rice.
Month 2 (weeks 5 through 8)
Your baby’s facial features continue to develop.
Each ear begins as a little fold of skin at the
side of the head. Tiny buds that eventually
grow into arms and legs are forming. Fingers,
toes and eyes are also forming.
The neural tube (brain, spinal cord and other
neural tissue of the central nervous system)
is well formed now. The digestive tract and
sensory organs begin to develop too. Bone
starts to replace cartilage.
Your baby’s head is large in proportion to
the rest of its body at this point. At about
six weeks, your baby’s heart beat can usually
be detected.
After the eighth week, your baby is called a
fetus instead of an embryo.
By the end of the second month, your baby is
about an inch long and weighs about 1/30 of
an ounce.
Month 3 (weeks 9 through 12)
Your baby’s arms, hands, fingers, feet and
toes are fully formed. At this stage, your baby
is starting to explore a bit by doing things
like opening and closing its fists and mouth.
Fingernails and toenails are beginning to
develop and the external ears are formed.
The beginnings of teeth are forming under the
gums. Your baby’s reproductive organs also
develop, but the baby’s genitalia is difficult to
distinguish on ultrasound.
By the end of the third month, your baby
is fully formed. All the organs and limbs
(extremities) are present and will continue
to develop in order to become functional.
The baby’s circulatory and urinary systems
are also working and the liver produces bile.
At the end of the third month, your baby
is about 4 inches long and weighs about
one ounce.
Since your baby’s most critical development
has taken place, your chance of miscarriage
drops considerably after three months.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |68Return to Table of Contents
When to Call Your Healthcare Provider During Your First
Trimester of Pregnancy
During the first trimester, there are a few
things to watch for.
Call your healthcare provider right away if
you have:
• A fever higher than 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit.
• Heavy bleeding, soaking more than one pad
an hour for three hours.
• Unusual or severe cramping or abdominal
pain.
• Severe or persistent vomiting and/or diarrhea.
• Fainting spells or dizziness.
• Pain, burning or trouble urinating.
• Unusual vaginal discharge.
• Swelling in your hands, fingers or face.
• Blurred vision or spots before your eyes.
• One arm or leg (extremity) swollen more than
the other.
• Severe headaches.
• Pain or cramping in your arms, legs or chest.
Additional Information About
Your Pregnancy
During your pregnancy, you CAN:
• Dye your hair.
• Have acrylic nails applied.
• Have TB (tuberculosis) skin testing
(Mantoux®) done.
• Go to a chiropractor.
• Shave your pubic hair (See below).
• Use insect repellent, DEET.
During your pregnancy, you should NOT:
• Use alcohol, drugs or smoke.
• Fast during holidays.
• Go in a whirlpool or hot tub.
• Visit a tanning bed.
• Shave pubic hair close to your delivery
date—clipping is preferred.
Resources
Additional websites that provide educational
material about pregnancy include:
American College of Nurse-Midwives:
www.midwife.org
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Pregnancy.
https://www.cdc.gov/pregnancy/index.html
March of Dimes
https://www.marchofdimes.org/
The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists.
https://www.acog.org/
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |69Return to Table of Contents
Prenatal Ultrasonography
What is ultrasonography?
In ultrasonography, or ultrasound, high-
frequency sound waves are sent through your
abdomen by a device called a transducer. The
sound waves are recorded and changed into
video or photographic images of your baby.
The ultrasound can be used during pregnancy
to show images of the amniotic sac, placenta
and ovaries.
The idea for ultrasonography came from sonar
technology, which makes use of sound waves
to detect underwater objects. Ultrasound might
be used with other diagnostic procedures, such
as amniocentesis, or by itself.
Are there any side effects?
Studies have shown ultrasound is not
hazardous. There are no harmful side effects
to you or your baby. In addition, ultrasound
does not use radiation, as X-ray tests do.
When is an ultrasound performed
during pregnancy?
Transvaginal ultrasound
Most prenatal ultrasound procedures are
performed on the surface of the skin, using
a gel as a conductive medium to aid the
quality of the image. However, a transvaginal
ultrasound is performed using a probe that is
inserted into the vaginal canal. This method of
ultrasound produces an image quality that is
greatly enhanced.
A transvaginal ultrasound may be used early in
pregnancy to determine how far along you are
in your pregnancy (gestational age) if this is
uncertain or unknown. It may also be used to
get a clearer view of the uterus or ovaries if a
problem is suspected.
Ultrasound
An ultrasound is generally performed for all
pregnant women around 20 weeks gestation.
During this ultrasound, the doctor will evaluate
whether the placenta is attached normally,
and that your baby is growing properly in
your uterus.
The baby’s heartbeat and movement of its
body, arms and legs can also be seen on the
ultrasound.
If you wish to know the sex of your baby, it
can usually be determined at 20 weeks. Be
sure to tell the ultrasound doctor whether or
not you want to know the sex of your baby.
Please understand that ultrasound is not 100%
percent accurate in confirming a baby’s sex.
There is a chance that the ultrasound images
can be misinterpreted.
An ultrasound might be performed earlier in
your pregnancy to determine:
• Presence of more than one fetus.
• Your due date or gestational age (the age of
the fetus).
Later in pregnancy, ultrasound might be used
to determine:
• Fetal well-being.
• Placenta location.
• Amount of amniotic fluid around the baby.
• Position of the baby.
• Baby’s expected weight.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |70Return to Table of Contents
Major anatomical abnormalities or birth defects
may be detected before birth on an ultrasound.
Even though ultrasound is safe for mother and
baby, it is a test that should be done only when
medically necessary. If you have an ultrasound
that is not medically necessary (for example,
to simply see the baby or find out the baby’s
sex), your insurance company might not pay
for the ultrasound.
Before the test
There is no special preparation for the
ultrasound test. Some doctors require you to
drink four to six glasses of water before the
test, so your bladder is full. This will help the
doctor view the baby better on the ultrasound.
You will be asked to refrain from urinating
until after the test. You will be allowed to go
to the bathroom right after the test has been
completed. You might be asked to change into
a hospital gown.
During the test
You will lie on a padded examination table
during the test. A small amount of water-
soluble gel is applied to the skin over your
abdomen. The gel does not harm your skin or
stain your clothes.
A small device, called a transducer, is gently
applied against the skin on your abdomen.
The transducer sends high-frequency sound
waves into the body, which reflect off internal
structures, including your baby. The sound
waves or echoes that reflect back are received
by the transducer and transformed into
pictures on a screen. These pictures can be
printed out.
There is virtually no discomfort during the test.
If a full bladder is required for the test, you
might feel some discomfort when the probe
is applied. You might be asked to hold your
breath briefly several times. The ultrasound
test takes about 30 minutes to complete.
After the test
The gel will be wiped off your skin. Your
ultrasound test is performed by a registered,
specially trained technologist and interpreted
by a board-certified physician. Your doctor
will review the test results with you at your
next visit.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |71Return to Table of Contents
Ultrasound Appointment Guidelines
Having an ultrasound for pregnancy can be
an exciting event, and your team of caregivers
is privileged to share in this experience. The
ultrasound is, however, a medical test ordered
by your physician. Giving you the best care
and overall patient experience during your
ultrasound appointment is our main goal. By
providing a tranquil, stress-free environment
with fewer distractions, you will receive the
best quality scan possible.
You can help this by:
• Limiting the number of adult visitors to two
during your appointment.
• Ensuring children under eight years of age
are accompanied and supervised by an
adult other than the patient.
• Refraining from cell phone use and taking
videos or pictures while exams and consults
are being performed.
Other important information:
• Pictures can help you and your family
members bond with your baby. Please know,
however, that clarity or availability of images
is not guaranteed.
• 3D image requests are not a standard part
of the examination and are not guaranteed.
• In an effort to provide our patients with
timely appointments, you are asked to
arrive promptly.
• Please be advised that if you arrive past
your scheduled appointment time, you may
have a delayed wait as we fit you back into
the schedule, or in some instances you may
be asked to reschedule.
• If you do not wish to be told the sex of the
baby at the time of the study, you can be
provided with a sealed envelope contain-
ing that information. Other requests, such
as calling individuals who are not present,
cannot be accommodated.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |72Return to Table of Contents
Our maternal-fetal medicine physicians
practice at these Ohio locations:
Akron General Hospital
330.384.1650
Ashtabula County Medical Center
440.997.6915
Beachwood Family Health Center
216.839.3100
Cleveland Clinic Main Campus A81
216.444.6601
Fairview Medical Center
216.476.7144
Akron General Health and
Wellness Center, Green
330.896.5010
Hillcrest Hospital Atrium
440.312.2229
Independence Family Health Center
216.986.4130
Lakewood Medical Office Building
216.237.6301
Medina Hospital
330.721.5350
Richard E. Jacobs Health Center (Avon)
440.695.4000
Strongsville Family Health Center
440.878.2500
Twinsburg Family Health Center
330.888.4000
Westlake Medical Campus
216.476.7144
Wooster Family Health Center
330.287.4930
Our maternal-fetal medicine physicians
practice at these Florida locations:
Cleveland Clinic Martin Health
772.345.5280
Cleveland Clinic Indian River Hospital
772.770.6116
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |73Return to Table of Contents
Screening for Chromosome Abnormalities in Pregnancy
Cleveland Clinic offers options for patients
who are interested in determining the risk for
chromosome abnormalities (extra or missing
number of chromosomes) and certain birth
defects in their baby during a pregnancy. These
tests allow patients the opportunity early in
pregnancy to find out if their baby has one of
these conditions.
While the risk for having a baby with a
chromosome abnormality increases with
the mother’s age at the time of delivery, the
majority of these babies are born to younger
women. Thus, screening is an option for
everyone. These tests are optimal and should
only be done after a thorough discussion with
your healthcare provider. In some instances,
your provider may refer you for genetic
counseling to see which, if any, test is best
for you.
Sequential Screening
The sequential screen combines ultrasound
and blood tests to determine the risk for
chromosome abnormalities, including Down
syndrome (trisomy 21) and trisomy 18.
It also determines the risk for a group of
birth defects known as open neural tube
defects (ONTD), which include spina bifida.
Ultrasound examination is performed in the
first trimester and involves measuring the
nuchal translucency. The nuchal translucency
is a fluid-filled space behind the neck, which is
typically increased in size in fetuses with Down
syndrome, other chromosome abnormalities,
and birth defects. Blood tests, which
measure the levels of certain hormones in the
mother, are drawn at the time of the nuchal
translucency measurement and again between
15 and 21 weeks gestational age.
• Results are made available following first
trimester testing and again after second
trimester blood test.
• This test can detect 90-92% of fetuses with
Down syndrome and 90% of fetuses with
trisomy 18, with a false positive rate is 5%.
• Patients at increased risk for chromosome
abnormalities based on their sequential
screen results have the opportunity for
additional testing, which can provide them
with a more definitive answer, including
testing such as chorionic villus sampling or
amniocentesis.
• The sequential test identifies approximately
75-90%% of babies with ONTDs, and when
combined with ultrasound in the second
trimester, approximately 95% of these cases
can be detected
• There are no risks to the mother or the fetus
with the sequential screen test.
• For patients who present for care after the
first trimester or decide later in pregnancy to
undergo screening, the quad screen can be
performed in the second trimester between
15 and 21 weeks gestational age. This test
detects 75-80% of cases of Down syndrome
and 60-75% of cases of Trisomy 18, with a
5-7% false positive rate. It can also detect
approximately 80% of cases on ONTDs.
• All patients, regardless of their choice to
undergo screening, are offered a detailed
ultrasound to evaluate fetal anatomy
between 18 and 20 weeks gestational age.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |74Return to Table of Contents
Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) or
Cell-Free DNA screening
NIPT evaluates fetal DNA, which is found
in the mother’s blood, to determine risks
for chromosome abnormalities such as
Down syndrome, trisomy 18, trisomy 13,
as well as certain abnormalities of fetal sex
chromosomes. Again, this is a blood test for
the mother and poses no risk to the pregnancy.
NIPT can be performed any time after 10
weeks gestational age. Previously NIPT was
recommended for patients at increased risk for
pregnancies with chromosomal abnormalities,
however recent evidence supports its use in
low-risk pregnancies and multiple pregnancies.
• NIPT can detect approximately 99% of
fetuses with Down syndrome and trisomy 18
and up to 92% of fetuses with trisomy 13.
• False positive results are rare but possible,
particularly in younger patients.
• There is no risk to mother or fetus.
• NIPT will decrease the need for invasive
testing for many patients; however,
any positive result should be confirmed
with either chorionic villus sampling or
amniocentesis, both of which are diagnostic.
• NIPT does not detect all chromosome
abnormalities. Therefore, further testing with
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling
may still be necessary in some cases with
abnormal ultrasound findings, even after a
negative NIPT result.
• NIPT does not provide a risk for ONTDs.
This result can be obtained via the maternal
serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP), which
should be performed between 15 and 21
weeks gestational age, as well as with
detailed ultrasound.
• All patients undergoing NIPT should
have a detailed ultrasound to evaluate
fetal anatomy between 18 and 20 weeks
gestational age.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |75Return to Table of Contents
CPT Codes for Genetic Tests
Screening procedures
Here are a list of common CPT codes for your reference. Some of the tests below are
considered screening tests, so you may want to contact your insurance company for coverage
information before the procedure.
PROCEDURE CPT
Transvaginal OB ultrasound 76817
Obstetrics ultrasound <14 weeks 76801
Nuchal translucency ultrasound 76813
Routine anatomy ultrasound 76805
High-risk detailed anatomy ultrasound 76811
OB follow-up ultrasound 76816
Fetal biophysical profile 76818, 76819
Fetal umbilical Doppler 76820
Fetal middle cerebral artery Doppler 76821
Amniocentesis 59000 and 76946
Chronic villus sampling (CVS) 59015 and 76945
NIPT or “Materni T21” if through Sequenom Lab* 81420*
*Please refer to NIPT Pamphlet MaterniT21 (Sequenom Lab)
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |76Return to Table of Contents
› Your second trimester of pregnancy
› Welcome to the second trimester
› When to call your provider
› Oral Glucose Challenge Test
3. Second Trimester
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |77Return to Table of Contents
Your Second Trimester of Pregnancy
Second trimester
This middle section of pregnancy is often
thought of as the best part of the experience.
By this time, any morning sickness is probably
gone and the discomfort of early pregnancy
has faded. The baby will start to develop
facial features during this month. You may
also start to feel movement as your baby flips
and turns in the uterus. During this trimester,
many people find out the sex of the baby. This
is typically done during an anatomy scan (an
ultrasound that checks your baby’s physical
development) around 20 weeks.
Month 4 (Weeks 13 through 16)
Your baby’s heartbeat may now be audible
through a Doppler ultrasound. The fingers
and toes are well-defined. Eyelids, eyebrows,
eyelashes, nails and hair are formed. Teeth
and bones become denser. Your baby can even
suck his or her thumb, yawn, stretch and make
faces.
The nervous system is starting to function.
The reproductive organs and genitalia are now
fully developed, and your doctor can see on
ultrasound if you are having a boy or a girl.
By the end of the fourth month, your baby
is about 6 inches long and weighs about
4 ounces.
Month 5 (Weeks 17 through 20)
At this stage, you may begin to feel your
baby moving around. Your baby is developing
muscles and exercising them. This first
movement is called quickening and can feel
like a flutter.
Hair begins to grow on baby’s head. Your
baby’s shoulders, back and temples are
covered by a soft fine hair called lanugo. This
hair protects your baby and is usually shed at
the end of the baby’s first week of life.
The baby’s skin is covered with a whitish
coating called vernix caseosa. This “cheesy”
substance is thought to protect your baby’s
skin from the long exposure to the amniotic
fluid. This coating is mostly shed just before
birth.
By the end of the fifth month, your baby is
about 10 inches long and weighs from 1/2 to
1 pound.
Month 6 (Weeks 21 through 24)
If you could look inside the uterusy right now,
you would see that your baby’s skin is reddish
in color, wrinkled and veins are visible through
the baby’s translucent skin. Finger and toe
prints are visible. In this stage, the eyelids begin
to part and the eyes open.
Baby responds to sounds by moving or
increasing the pulse. You may notice jerking
motions if the baby hiccups.
If born prematurely, your baby may survive
after the 23rd week with intensive care.
By the end of the sixth month, your baby
is about 12 inches long and weighs about
2 pounds.
Month 7 (Weeks 25 through 28)
Your baby will continue to mature and develop
reserves of body fat. At this point, the baby’s
hearing is fully developed. The baby changes
position frequently and responds to stimuli,
including sound, pain and light. The amniotic
fluid begins to diminish.
If born prematurely, your baby would be likely
to survive after the seventh month.
At the end of the seventh month, your baby is
about 14 inches long and weighs from 2 to
4 pounds.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |78Return to Table of Contents
When to Call Your Healthcare Provider During the
Second Trimester.
(13-28 Weeks)
During the second trimester, there are a few
things to watch for. Please call your healthcare
provider right away if you have:
• Unusual or severe cramping or abdominal
pain.
• Noticeable changes, such as a decrease
in your baby’s movement after 28 weeks
gestation (ewer than six to 10 movements
in one hour or less).
• Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
that seems to be getting worse.
• Signs of premature labor, including:
• Regular tightening or pain in the lower
abdomen or back.
• Any bleeding in the second or
third trimester.
• Fluid leak.
• Pressure in the pelvis or vagina.
Rh factor testing in the second trimester
Rh factor is an antigen protein found on most
people’s red blood cells. If you don’t have the
protein, then you are Rh- (negative). You will
be given an injection of Rh immune globulin
(called Rhogam®) during the 28th week of
your pregnancy to prevent the development of
antibodies that could be harmful to your baby.
You will also be given an injection of Rhogam®
after delivery if your baby has Rh+ blood.
If you are Rh- you may also receive this
injection if you:
• Are having an invasive procedure (such as
an amniocentesis).
• Had an abdominal trauma.
• Had any significant bleeding during
pregnancy.
• If you need to have your baby turned inside
the uterus (due to breech presentation).
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |79Return to Table of Contents
Oral Glucose Challenge Test During Pregnancy
What is an oral glucose challenge test?
The oral glucose challenge test is performed
to screen for gestational diabetes. This test
involves quickly (within five minutes) drinking
a sweetened liquid (called Glucola), which
contains 50 grams of glucose. A blood sample
is taken from a vein in your arm about 60
minutes after drinking the solution. The blood
test measures how the glucose solution was
processed by the body.
Normal blood glucose levels peak within 30
to 60 minutes after drinking the glucose
solution. A higher than normal blood glucose
level does not always mean you have
gestational diabetes.
When is the oral glucose challenge
test performed?
Gestational diabetes is generally diagnosed
between the 24th and 28th week of
pregnancy. If you have had gestational diabetes
in a previous pregnancy, or if your healthcare
provider is concerned about your risk of
developing gestational diabetes, the test might
be performed earlier.
On the day of the test, please follow
instructions given to you by your healthcare
provider or the lab (if applicable).
General guidelines
You may eat a light breakfast on the day of the
test, avoiding items with high sugar content,
such as orange juice, pancakes and doughnuts.
Report to your specified location for the
Glucola drink. After drinking the Glucola, do
not ingest any food or drink and do not smoke
until your blood is drawn, one hour later.
If there is a lab at your healthcare provider’s
office, it may be done at the time of one of
your prenatal visits.
Further diagnostic test
If your healthcare provider determines your
blood glucose level was elevated, you will have
an additional gestational diabetes screening
test. The follow-up test is called a gluose
tolerance test. It is a longer, more definitive
test that will determine if you have gestational
diabetes. If this test is indicated, your
healthcare provider will provide you with more
information on how it is done.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |80Return to Table of Contents
› Your third trimester of pregnancy
› When to call your provider during the third trimester
› Counting your baby kicks
› Non stress test
› Group B streptococcus and pregnancy
› True vs. false labor
› Premature labor
› What to pack for the hospital
› Your birth day
› Types of delivery
› Pain relief options during childbirth
4. Third Trimester
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |81Return to Table of Contents
Your Third Trimester of Pregnancy
Third trimester
This is the final part of your pregnancy. During
this trimester your baby will mature and add
weight. You will experience symptoms during
your final trimester like frequent urination,
backaches and even hiccups—which are
actually a normal part of pregnancy at this
stage. You may be tempted to start the
countdown till your due date and hope that it
would come early, but each week of this final
stage of development helps your baby prepare
for childbirth. Throughout the third trimester,
your baby will gain weight quickly, adding body
fat that will help after birth.
Remember, even though popular culture only
mentions nine months of pregnancy, you
may actually be pregnant for 10 months.
The typical, full-term pregnancy is 40 weeks,
which can take you into a tenth month. It’s
also possible that you can go past your due
date by a week or two (41 or 42 weeks). Your
healthcare provider will monitor you closely as
you approach your due date. If you pass your
due date, and don’t go into spontaneous labor,
your provider may induce labor. This means
that medications will be used to make you
go into labor and have the baby. Make sure
to talk to your healthcare provider during this
trimester about your birth plan.
Month 8 (Weeks 29 through 32)
Your baby will continue to mature and develop
reserves of body fat. You may notice that
your baby is kicking more. Baby’s brain is
developing rapidly at this time, and your baby
can see and hear. Most internal systems are
well developed, but the lungs may still be
immature.
Your baby is about 18 inches long and weighs
as much as 5 pounds.
Month 9 (Weeks 33 through 36)
During this stage, your baby will continue to
grow and mature. The lungs are close to being
fully developed at this point.
Your baby’s reflexes are coordinated so he or
she can blink, close the eyes, turn the head,
grasp firmly, and respond to sounds, light
and touch.
Your baby is about 17 to 19 inches long and
weighs from 5 ½ to 6 ½ pounds.
Month 10 (Weeks 37 through 40)
In this final month, you could go into labor at
any time. You may notice that your baby moves
less due to tight space. At this point, your
baby’s position may have changed to prepare
for birth. Ideally, the baby is head down in your
uterus. You may feel very uncomfortable in this
final stretch of time as the baby drops down
into your pelvis and prepares for birth.
Your baby is ready to meet the world at
this point.
Your baby is about 18 to 20 inches long and
weighs about 7 pounds.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |82Return to Table of Contents
When to Call Your Healthcare Provider During Your Third
Trimester of Pregnancy
(29-41 Weeks)
During the third trimester, you should
call your healthcare provider right away
if you have:
• Unusual or severe cramping or abdominal
pain.
• Noticeable changes, such as a decrease
in your baby’s movement after 28 weeks
gestation (fewer than six to 10 movements
in one hour or less).
• Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
that seems to be getting worse.
(37-41 Weeks)
Cleveland Clinic follows ACOG national
guidelines regarding induction of labor. If your
pregnancy is healthy, it is best to let labor
begin on its own.
Cleveland Clinic recommends against induction
of labor before 41 weeks for healthy mothers
with healthy babies. Women who go into labor
naturally have a lower risk of complications
such as C-section and excessive bleeding.
Signs of premature labor (before 36 weeks)
• Four or more contractions or tightening of
the muscles in the uterus in one hour
that do not go away after changing your
position or relaxing.
• Regular tightening or low, dull pain in
your back that either comes or goes or is
constant (but is not relieved by changing
positions or other comfort measures).
• Pressure in the pelvis or vagina.
• Lower abdominal cramping that might feel
like gas pain (with or without diarrhea).
• Increased pressure in the pelvis or vagina.
• Persistent menstrual-like cramps.
• Increased vaginal discharge.
• Leaking of fluid from the vagina.
• Vaginal bleeding.
• Flu-like symptoms such as nausea,
vomiting and diarrhea.
• Signs of preeclampsia
• Vision problems.
• Headaches.
• Pain in the upper abdomen.
• Sudden weight gain.
• Severe leg pain and swelling.
Signs of labor after 36 weeks
• Your water breaks.
• Strong contractions occur every five
minutes for one hour.
• Labor contractions that are not stopped by
changing your position or relaxing.
• Contractions that you are unable to
walk through.
Things to Do Before the Big Day
• Register at your hospital of delivery.
• Choose a pediatrician. Make an appointment
to visit the office and meet the pediatrician,
if you choose.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |83Return to Table of Contents
• Take a tour of the maternity unit. Some
hospitals offer sibling tours. Tours will let
you know where to be dropped off and park
on your delivery day.
• Know your healthcare providers evening
phone number and review how you will
get in touch with your ride and/or support
person.
• If you want to take childbirth or
breastfeeding classes, now’s the time.
For a complete list of classes go to:
clevelandclinic.org/babyclasses.
• Go to the dentist if you haven’t in a while.
• Update your insurance policies and wills
to include the baby. We encourage making
a living will and a power-of-attorney for
healthcare plan.
• Contact your insurance company regarding a
breast pump. They will direct you where to
obtain one.
• Decide if you want to take the cord blood for
your own use or donate it.
• Decide what you want to do about
contraception after the birth of your baby.
• Consider the pros and cons of
circumcision for a male infant.
• Get your maternity leave/family leave
paperwork in order for both you and
your partner.
• Buy the things you will need for your
baby, especially the car seat.
• Continue to take your prenatal supplement.
Make sure you are getting enough calcium
and iron.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |84Return to Table of Contents
Counting Your Baby’s
Movements (Kick
Counts/NST)
Your baby’s regular movements are a sign
of good health
Though babies may sleep for up to an hour,
most of the time your baby is active and
moving. On average, a healthy baby kicks or
moves at least six to 10 times within a one
hour period.
An easy way to check the health of your baby
is to keep track of your baby’s movements
twice a day (“kick counts”). We think it is best
to begin kick counts at 28 to 30 weeks of
pregnancy and continue each day until your
baby’s birth.
How to count and record your
baby’s movements
Pick a time twice a day to record your baby’s
movements. Your baby may be most active
when you are at rest. Many women find after a
meal to be the best time to record their baby’s
movements. Sit in a comfortable position and
place your hands, palms down, on your baby.
When you’re ready to begin counting your
baby’s movements, look at the time. Mark the
start time and count each time you feel your
baby kick, move, roll, flutter or swish. Continue
counting until your baby has moved six to 10
times. If you do not count six to 10 movements
in one hour or less, call your healthcare
provider right away for further instructions.
Non-Stress Testing (NST)
The NST is the most common special fetal
test. It measures your baby’s heart rate in
response to the baby’s environment.
The NST can be done at your healthcare
provider’s office or in a hospital setting. NST
can be performed while you are sitting in a
chair or lying down. The test takes roughly
20 minutes.
Two belts are placed on your abdomen; one
has sensors to measure the fetal heart rate and
the other detects uterine contractions. You will
also be asked to record your baby’s movement
by pressing a button. Most babies have a
sleep/wake schedule of 20 to 40 minutes.
Results of the NST will be interpreted by your
healthcare provider. Depending on the results,
you may have additional testing such as a
biophysical profile or contraction stress test.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |85Return to Table of Contents
Group B Streptococcus and Pregnancy
What is Group B Streptococcus?
Group B Streptococcus (GBS) is a normal
bacteria (germ) that is present in up to of
pregnant women. A woman with GBS can
pass the bacteria to her infant during delivery.
Most newborns who get GBS do not become
ill. However, the bacteria can cause serious
and even life-threatening infections in a small
percentage of newborns.
How does a baby get GBS?
In pregnant women, GBS is found most
frequently in the vagina and rectum, (this is
different than strep throat, which is Group A
Streptococcus). GBS can live in a pregnant
woman’s body and cause symptoms and an
infection. GBS can also live in a pregnant
woman’s body and not cause any symptoms
and not pose any danger to her health. In this
situation, the woman is called a carrier.
Early infection: Among the babies who
become infected, most of the infections (75%)
occur in the first week of life. In fact, most
infection is apparent within a few hours after
birth. Sepsis, pneumonia and meningitis are
the most common problems. Premature babies
face greater risk if they become infected, but
most babies (75%) who get GBS are full-term.
Late infection: GBS infection might also
occur in infants one week to several months
after birth. Meningitis is more common with
late-onset GBS-related infection than with
early-onset infection. About half the babies
who develop late-onset GBS got the infection
passed to them from their mothers during
birth. The source of the infection for others
with late disease is thought to be contact with
other people who are GBS carriers, or the GBS
carrier mother after birth, or perhaps still other
unknown sources. Late-onset infection is less
common and is less likely to result in a baby’s
death than early-onset infection.
Will I be tested for GBS?
Your doctor will test you for GBS late in your
pregnancy, around week 35 to 37, by using
a cotton swab to take samples of cells from
the vagina, cervix and rectum. Testing for GBS
earlier than this will not help predict if you will
have GBS at the time of delivery.
Delivery is a time of increased exposure to
GBS bacteria for newborns if it is present in
the vagina or rectum of the mother. A positive
culture result means you are a GBS carrier, but
it does not mean that you or your baby will
definitely become ill.
How is GBS treated?
In the pregnant mother: The most effective
way to prevent GBS infection in your baby is
to treat you with antibiotics during labor if you
test positive as a carrier of GBS. Being a carrier
of GBS is a temporary situation. It is important
to treat at the time of labor as it is not effective
to treat at an earlier time.
If you test positive your provider will treat you
with an antibiotic administered through a vein
during your labor and delivery. Giving you an
antibiotic at this time helps prevent the spread
of GBS from you to your newborn; 90% of
infections are prevented by this protocol.
One exception to the timing of treatment is
when GBS is detected in urine. When this is
the case, oral antibiotic treatment should begin
at the time GBS is identified regardless of stage
of pregnancy and be given again intravenously
during labor.
Any pregnant woman who has previously given
birth to a baby who developed a GBS infection,
or who has had a urinary tract infection in this
pregnancy caused by GBS, will also be treated
during labor.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |86Return to Table of Contents
In the newborn: Despite testing and antibiotic
treatment during a pregnant woman’s labor,
some babies still get GBS infections. Common
symptoms of GBS infection in newborns are
fever, difficulty feeding, irritability or lethargy
(limpness or difficulty in waking up the baby).
Your doctor might take a sample of the baby’s
blood or spinal fluid to see if the baby has GBS
infection. Antibiotics will be given if treatment
is determined to be necessary.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |87Return to Table of Contents
True vs. False Labor
Before true labor begins, you might have
false labor pains, also known as Braxton
Hicks contractions. These irregular uterine
contractions are perfectly normal and might
start to occur from your fourth month of
pregnancy. They are your body’s way of
getting ready for the real thing.
What do Braxton Hicks contractions
feel like?
Braxton Hicks contractions can be described
as tightening in the abdomen that comes and
goes. These contractions do not get closer
together, do not increase in how long they
last or how often they occur, and do not feel
stronger over time. They often come with a
change of position and stop with rest.
What do true labor contractions feel like?
The way a contraction feels is different for
each woman and might feel different from
one pregnancy to the next. Labor contractions
cause discomfort or a dull ache in your back
and lower abdomen, along with pressure in the
pelvis. Some women might also feel pain in
their sides and thighs. Some women describe
contractions as strong menstrual cramps, while
others describe them as strong waves that feel
like diarrhea cramps.
So how do you know when you are having
true labor?
Timing of contractions:
False labor: Contractions are often irregular
and do not get closer together.
True labor: Contractions come at regular
intervals and get closer together as time goes
on. True labor contractions also become longer,
stronger and more intense. (Contractions last
about 30 to 70 seconds each.)
Change with movement:
False labor: Contractions might stop when
you walk or rest, or might even stop when you
change position.
True labor: Contractions continue, despite
moving or changing positions.
Sharp, shooting pains on either side of your
abdomen that travel into the groin might result
from stretching ligaments that support your
growing uterus.
To ease your discomforts of false labor pains:
• Try changing your position or activity.
• Make sure you are drinking enough fluids (at
least 10 to 12 glasses of water, juice or milk
per day).
• Try to rest and relax.
Your healthcare provider is available any
time to answer your questions and ease
your concerns about whether or not your
contractions are signs of true or false labor.
Don’t be afraid to call your healthcare provider
if you are not sure what it is you are feeling.
He or she might ask you some questions to
help determine if you are truly in labor. If
there’s any question at all, it’s better to be
evaluated by your healthcare provider.
It is essential to call your healthcare provider at
any time if you have:
• Bright red vaginal bleeding.
• Continuous leaking of fluid or wetness, or if
your water breaks (can be felt as a gushing
of fluid).
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |88Return to Table of Contents
• Strong contractions every five minutes for
one hour.
• Contractions that you are unable to
walk through.
• A noticeable change in your baby’s
movement, or if you feel fewer than six to
10 movements in one hour.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |89Return to Table of Contents
Premature Labor
What is premature labor?
Premature or pre-term labor is labor that
begins more than three weeks before you are
expected to deliver. Contractions (tightening
of the muscles in the uterus) cause the cervix
(lower end of the uterus) to open earlier
than normal.
Pre-term labor might result in the birth of a
premature baby.
However, labor often can be stopped to allow
the baby more time to grow and develop in
the uterus. Treatments to stop premature labor
include bed rest, fluids given intravenously (in
your vein) and medicines to relax the uterus.
What are the signs of premature labor?
It is important for you to learn the signs of
premature labor so you can get help to stop
it and prevent your baby from being born too
early. To check for contractions, place your
fingertips on your abdomen.
If you can feel your uterus tightening
and softening, write down how often the
contractions are happening.
Please call your healthcare provider right
away if you have any of the following
symptoms and if the symptoms noted below
do not go away in one hour, or if the pain is
severe and persistent:
• Four or more contractions or tightening of
the muscles in the uterus in one hour that
do not go away after changing your position
or relaxing.
• Regular tightening or low, dull pain in
your back that either comes or goes or is
constant (but is not relieved by changing
positions or other comfort measures).
• Lower abdominal cramping that might feel
like gas pain (with or without diarrhea).
• Increased pressure in the pelvis or vagina.
• Persistent menstrual-like cramps.
• Increased vaginal discharge.
• Leaking of fluid from the vagina.
• Vaginal bleeding.
• Flu-like symptoms such as nausea, vomiting
and diarrhea.
• Decreased fetal movements (fewer than six
to 10 times in a one-hour period).
Placenta
Umbilical
cord
Vagina
Cervix
Amniotic
sac
2012
CCF
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |90Return to Table of Contents
What happens if your healthcare provider
instructs you to go to the hospital?
After you talk to your healthcare provider about
your signs of premature labor, he or she might
tell you to go to the hospital. Once you arrive:
• Your pulse, blood pressure and temperature
will be checked.
• A monitor will be placed on your abdomen
to check the baby’s heart rate and evaluate
uterine contractions.
• Your cervix will be checked to see if it
is opening.
If you are in premature labor, you might
receive medicine to stop labor. If the labor has
progressed and cannot be stopped, you might
need to deliver your baby. If you are not in
premature labor, you will be able to go home.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |91Return to Table of Contents
What to Pack for the Hospital
It is a good idea to pack your bag a month or
two before your due date. Then you don’t have
to rush around when it is time to go!
Here are some ideas for what to pack:
• Photo identification and insurance card.
• Personal toiletries (contact lenses, glasses,
pip balm, soap, shampoo, conditioner,
lotion, toothbrush and toothpaste, etc.).
• Hair accessories to pull your hair back if you
need it.
• Back massage aids like tennis balls, hand
held massager, etc.
• Aromatherapy oils.
• Robe.
• One or two nightgowns or comfortable
clothes for sleeping. Of course, we have
hospital gowns you can use.
• Three or four pairs of cotton underwear.
• Slippers/socks.
• Two or three supportive bras. Nursing bras
are good.
• List of names and phone numbers of family
and friends to notify about your good news!
Cell phones may be used.
• Personal entertainment. This may
include books, magazines or downloaded
movies. Some people bring video games.
REMEMBER YOUR CHARGING CABLES.
• Comfortable shoes to wear home.
Here is what your labor coach should pack:
• Snacks or money for snacks and meals.
• At least one change of clothes.
• Personal toiletries.
• Slippers or socks.
• Comfortable clothes for sleeping.
• Cell phone.
• Chargers for their electronics.
Here is what you should pack for your baby:
• Car seat: It is a good idea to install your
car about a month before your due date.
Installing it early will help you to be sure
that it is installed properly. Some car
dealers, police, or fire stations have free
safety inspections for car seat installation.
Check to see what is available in your
community.
• T-shirt (not a “onesie.” You don’t want to
cover the umbilical cord).
• Sleeper.
• Receiving blanket.
• Hat.
• Clothes to wear home. (Remember that you
will want to dress your baby for whatever
weather you are dressing for. If it is cold,
bring warm clothes and if it is hot, bring
cool ones.)
Please note: Everything your baby needs for
his or her stay in the hospital will be provided,
including diapers.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |92Return to Table of Contents
Your Birth Day: What to Expect During Labor
It is normal for you to feel both excited and
scared about labor and delivery. We hope this
handout helps answer questions so you will
know what to expect.
When does labor begin?
Labor begins when the cervix begins to open
(dilate) and thin (efface). The muscles of the
uterus tighten (contract) at regular intervals
During the contractions (or surges) the
abdomen becomes hard. Between them,
it will soften as the uterus relaxes.
How will I know if I’m in labor?
Some people experience very distinct signs of
labor while others don’t. Many people will have
a sense that they are in early labor without
really being certain. No one knows what
causes labor to start, but several hormonal and
physical changes may indicate the beginning
of labor. Your contractions will often start at
regular, but spaced intervals. Over time, they
will gradually get stronger and more frequent.
You are looking for surges that last for a full
minute. If you think you are in labor but are
uncertain, call your provider and discuss the
possibilities!
Some of the changes you may experience
include:
Lightening
This is the process of you baby settling or
lowering into your pelvis. It can happen a few
weeks or a few hours before labor. Because
your uterus rests on your bladder, you may feel
that you have to urinate more frequently with
lightening.
Mucous Plug
The mucous plug accumulates at the cervical
opening during pregnancy to protect your baby.
When your cervix starts to open a bit, or make
changes bringing you closer to labor, you may
see some of the mucous that was in the cervix.
It may be clear, pink or slightly bloody. Labor
can start soon after the mucous plug comes
out or even a few weeks later.
Contractions
We refer to labor as the time when contractions
come at regular intervals and increase in
frequency (how often they occur), duration
(how long the surge lasts), and intensity (how
strong the contractions are). As time passes,
the surges will come at closer intervals and will
get stronger.
Labor contractions can cause discomfort or a
dull ache in your back and lower abdomen,
along with pressure in your lower pelvis. Some
people describe their contractions as strong
menstrual cramps. You may notice a small
amount of bleeding from the vagina. Labor
contractions are not stopped by changing your
position, hydrating or relaxing. Although the
surges may be uncomfortable, you will be able
to relax between them.
Placenta
Umbilical
cord
Vagina
Cervix
Mucus
plug
Uterus
Amniotic
fluid
Amniotic
sac
2012
CCF
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |93Return to Table of Contents
This first part of your labor is called the first
stage, or latent phase of labor. It is much
easier to manage in the comfort of your
home than in the hospital. Of course, you
should make certain that your baby is moving
normally through this time. This is a great time
to do the kick counts that you’ve be taught to
do. If you have worries, contact your provider.
Timing your contractions
Write down the time at the beginning of a
contraction and the time at the end of the
same surge. This includes time you are
contracting and the time of rest, before the
next one.
These suggestions may help you cope
during early labor
If contractions are serious and you are really
laboring, you won’t be able to calm them
down. Surges that can be made to go away are
not likely to be real labor. Try these things to
help you cope:
• Try to distract yourself with a walk,
shopping, or watching a movie.
• Soak in a warm tub or take a warm shower.
• Try to sleep. You are going to need the
energy for labor!
Will your waters break?
The amniotic sac around the baby (your
waters) only breaks about 10% of the time.
If it does, you may feel either a sudden gush
of fluid or a trickle of fluid that leaks steadily.
This fluid is usually straw-colored and odorless.
If your water breaks, you should let your
provider know. Think of the term TACO and let
your provider know the details: T=time that
your waters broke, A=the amount of fluid you
felt, C=the color of the fluid, and O=the odor
of the fluid.
Labor may not start right away. As always,
make sure that your baby is moving well.
If you are worried, tell us!
Effacement and dilation of the cervix
Your cervix gets shorter and thins out in order
in order to stretch and open around your
baby’s head. The shortening and thinning of
the cervix is called effacement and is measured
in percentages from 0% to 100%. The stretch
and opening of your cervix is called dilation
and is measured from one to 10 centimeters.
Effacement and dilation are a direct result
of effective uterine contractions. Progress in
labor is measured by how much the cervix has
opened and thinned to allow your baby to pass
through the vagina.
When should I call my provider or go to
the hospital?
Please call your provider according to their
instructions. Call us during early labor if you
have questions or concerns.
Also call if:
• Your think your waters have broken.
• You are bleeding and it is more than
just spotting.
• Your contractions become very strong-you
cannot walk through them-and they have
been that way every 3-5 minutes for an
hour. (If you have already had one baby,
you may not want to wait that long. Talk
with your provider.)
• If you are concerned about your baby’s
movement.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |94Return to Table of Contents
What happens when I get to the hospital?
When you get to the hospital, you will go to
Labor and Delivery and check in at the desk.
Most times, you will be seen first in the triage
area for admission to the hospital or for testing.
Please have only one person go with you to
triage. The rooms are quite small. If you are
admitted, you will be taken to your labor room.
When you arrive there, you may experience the
following:
• Your pulse, blood pressure and temperature
will be checked.
• A monitor will be placed on your abdomen
to check on your baby’s heart rate and also
on contractions.
• A nurse or provider will examine your cervix
to see how far labor has progressed.
• An IV (intravenous) line may be placed
into a vein in your arm to deliver fluids
and medicines.
Types of delivery
Vaginal delivery is the most common type of
delivery, but sometimes, help is needed. This
help can come in the form of vacuum or forceps
assists or sometimes, a cesarean section.
These delivery types are described in the
“Types of Deliveries” section of this booklet.
What are the stages of labor?
The first stage of labor is the longest part of
labor and is divided into two parts, early labor
and active labor.
Early Labor
During early labor, your cervix will start to
dilate and efface, or thin. These changes come
as a result of the regular and strengthening
contractions that you will feel. Some people
will notice some slightly bloody discharge from
the vagina. This early labor can last from hours
to days. It is best done at home as long as you
know that your baby is active and well. This
is the time that you will want to use some
of those distractions mentioned earlier. Your
excitement will likely be high during early labor.
Active Labor
During active labor, surges become stronger
and closer together. We often tell our patients
to call us when contractions are five minutes
apart, last for one minute, and have been
consistent for one hour. Remember 5-1-1.
You may notice that the surges are felt in your
abdomen and in your back. This is the time to
call us and head into the hospital. Your waters
may (or may not) break at this time.
Sometimes during active labor, you may find
your excitement giving way to some hesitation
and fear. You may ask for pain relief in this
phase. This is a good time to talk with your
provider about the best ways to get you what
you need for discomfort. You’re the only one
who knows what you want for pain relief.
The second stage of labor begins when your
cervix is completely dilated. Most people feel
an urge to bear down as they enter the second
stage of labor. It can take a few minutes or a
few hours to push your baby into the world.
Some of the things that can affect how long it
takes are whether or not you have had another
baby, a baby’s size, and a baby’s position. You
may want to try pushing in several positions
when you are pushing. Sometimes, the best
way to push is on your hands and knees. Your
provider may ask you to push more gently. This
will allow your perineum to stretch gently and
help reduce injury. Once the baby’s head is
out, the body should quickly follow. Your baby
will be placed on your abdomen if everything
is going according to plan. Often, when there
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |95Return to Table of Contents
are no complications, your partner or you
can catch your baby. After a short delay, the
umbilical cord will be clamped and cut and we
will wait for the placenta to follow.
The third stage of labor is the time when the
placenta is delivering. Generally, all you will
need to do during this time is to focus on your
newborn and try to relax. Occasionally, we may
ask you to push once or twice. Remember,
though, that the placenta is much smaller
and softer than a whole baby! We like to see
the placenta deliver within about 30 minutes.
Managing your bleeding is very important,
not just for your health, but to keep up a milk
supply if you are planning on nursing. We often
use some medications to make sure that your
uterus tightens up when the placenta comes
out. This helps to control bleeding.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |96Return to Table of Contents
Types of Delivery
What is an assisted delivery?
Vaginal delivery is the most common type
of birth. When necessary, assisted delivery
methods are needed. While labor can be a
straightforward, uncomplicated process, it
might require the assistance of the medical
staff. This assistance can vary from use of
medicines to emergency delivery procedures.
The procedure your doctor might use will
depend on the conditions that might arise
while you are in labor. These assisted delivery
procedures can include the following.
Episiotomy
An episiotomy is a surgical incision made in
the perineum (the area of skin between the
vagina and the anus). The incision enlarges
the vaginal opening to allow the baby’s head
to pass through more easily and to prevent
tearing of the mother’s skin. Most women
will not need one. This is reserved for special
circumstances.
There are two types of incisions:
• The midline, made directly back toward
the anus.
• The mediolateral, which slants away from
the anus. A local anesthetic might be used
in mothers who do not opt for an epidural
during labor.
Amniotomy (Breaking the Bag of Water)
An amniotomy is the artificial rupture of the
amniotic membranes, or sac, which contains
the fluid surrounding the baby. The amniotomy
can be done either before or during labor.
An amniotomy is usually done to:
• Induce or augment labor.
• Place an internal monitor to assess the
uterine contraction pattern.
• Place an internal monitor on the baby’s
scalp to assess the infant’s well-being.
• Check for meconium (a greenish-brown
substance, which is the baby’s first stool).
Your healthcare provider will use an
amniohook, which looks like a crochet hook,
to rupture the sac. Once the procedure is
completed, delivery should take place within
24 hours to prevent infection.
Induced labor
For a number of reasons, your provider may
need to start your labor rather than wait
for labor to begin on its own. Labor is most
often induced in pregnancies with medical
problems or other complications. Cleveland
Clinic follows ACOG national guidelines
regarding induction of labor. If you have non-
medical circumstances leaning you toward
induced labor that you want to discuss with
your provider, we encourage that conversation.
Induction of labor is typically reserved for
medical indications where benefit outweighs
risk.
Labor can be induced either mechanically, with
a cervical ripening balloon, or with medicines
like cytotec and oxytocin. The decision on
which method to use depends on how ripe,
or favorable, your cervix is for induction. The
cervical ripening balloon and cytotec tend to
help soften and thin the cervix, although on
occasion, can also promote labor. Oxytocin is
given through an intravenous line and causes
your uterus to contract. Contractions also
soften and thin the uterus, but they also help
to bring your baby down into the pelvis.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |97Return to Table of Contents
Common medical reasons for inducing
labor can include:
• Diabetes.
• High blood pressure.
• Ruptured membranes.
• A baby that has growth restriction.
• A past due pregnancy.
Fetal monitoring
This is the process of watching your baby’s
heart rate in relation to your contractions.
Monitoring can either be external or internal.
• External monitoring consists of placing two
paddles on your abdomen and securing
them with Velcro belts. One paddle is a
small ultrasound and it records information
about your baby’s heartbeat. The second
paddle records when your contractions are
happening and how long they last. Monitors
that use Bluetooth technology, and don’t
require you to be connected to a machine,
may be available.
• Internal monitoring involves placing a
small electrode on the baby’s head to
monitor the baby’s heartbeat. This is the
most accurate way to monitor the baby’s
heartbeat. A small pressure sensor is
placed near the baby to measure the
strength of the contractions.
Forceps delivery
Forceps look like two large spoons that the
doctor inserts into the vagina and around the
baby’s head to gently deliver it through the
vagina. You will still have to push your baby
out. The rest of the baby is delivered normally.
Your healthcare provider will discuss any
risk with you.
Vacuum extraction
A vacuum extractor looks like a small suction
cup that is placed on the baby’s head to help
with delivery. A vacuum is created using a
pump, and the baby is guided down the birth
canal. The pump can often leave a bruise
on the baby’s head, which typically resolves
within 48 hours.
Cesarean section
A cesarean section, also called a C-section,
is a surgical procedure performed if a vaginal
delivery is not possible. During this procedure,
the baby is delivered through surgical incisions
made in the abdomen and the uterus.
When would I need a cesarean section?
A cesarean delivery might be planned in
advance if a medical reason calls for it, or it
might be unplanned and take place during your
labor if certain problems arise.
You might need to have a planned cesarean
delivery if any of the following conditions exist:
• Cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD): This is
a term that means that the baby’s head or
body is too large to pass safely through the
mother’s pelvis, or the mother’s pelvis is too
small to deliver a normal-sized baby.
• Previous cesarean birth: Although it is
possible to have a vaginal birth after a
previous cesarean, it is not an option for
all women. Factors that can affect whether
a cesarean is needed include the type
of uterine incision used in the previous
cesarean and the number of prior cesareans,
which impact the risk of rupturing the uterus
with a vaginal birth.
• Multiple pregnancy: Although twins can
often be delivered vaginally, two or more
babies might require a cesarean delivery.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |98Return to Table of Contents
• Placenta previa: In this condition, the
placenta is attached too low in the uterine
wall and blocks the baby’s exit through the
cervix.
• Transverse lie: The baby is in a horizontal,
or sideways, position in the uterus. If your
doctor determines that the baby cannot be
turned through abdominal manipulation,
you will need to have a cesarean delivery.
• Breech presentation: In a breech
presentation, or breech birth, the baby is
positioned to deliver feet or butt first. If your
doctor determines that the baby cannot be
turned through abdominal manipulation, you
will need to have a cesarean delivery.
An unplanned cesarean delivery might be
needed if any of the following conditions
arise during your labor:
• Failure of labor to progress: In this
condition, the cervix begins to dilate and
stops before the woman is fully dilated, or
the baby stops moving down the birth canal.
• Cord compression: The umbilical cord is
looped around the baby’s neck or body, or
caught between the baby’s head and the
mother’s pelvis, compressing the cord.
• Prolapsed cord: In rare occurrence, the
umbilical cord comes out of the cervix
before the baby does.
• Abruptio placentae: Rarely, the placenta
separates from the wall of the uterus before
the baby is born. During labor, the baby
might begin to develop heart rate patterns
that could present a problem. Your doctor
might decide that the baby can no longer
tolerate labor and that a cesarean delivery is
necessary.
• Fetal distress: The baby is not tolerating
labor and not responding to measures taken
to make them feel better. Your baby could
be at risk for serious injury.
What can I expect before the cesarean?
If the cesarean delivery is not an emergency,
the following procedures will take place.
• You will be asked if you consent to the
procedure, and in some hospitals, you
might be asked to sign a consent form.
• The anesthesiologist will discuss the type
of anesthesia to be used.
• You will have a heart, pulse and blood
pressure monitor applied.
• Hair clipping will be done around the
incision area.
• A catheter will be inserted to keep your
bladder empty.
• Medicine will be put directly into your vein.
What is the procedure for a cesarean?
At the start of the procedure, the anesthesia
will be administered. Your abdomen will then
be cleaned with an antiseptic. Our anesthesia
team will be sure that you are comfortable
prior to the surgery. The doctor will then make
an incision through your skin and into the
wall of the abdomen. They might use either
a vertical or horizontal incision. (A horizontal
incision is also called a bikini incision, because
it is placed beneath the belly button.) Next, a
three- to four-inch incision is then made in the
wall of the uterus, and the doctor removes the
baby through the incisions. The umbilical cord
is then cut, the placenta is removed and the
incisions are closed. The whole procedure will
take one to two hours.
What happens after the delivery?
Because the cesarean is major surgery, it will
take you longer to recover from this type of
delivery than it would from a vaginal delivery.
Depending on your condition, you will probably
stay in the hospital from two to four days.
Once the anesthesia wears off, you will begin
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |99Return to Table of Contents
to feel the pain from the incisions, so be
sure to ask for pain medicine. You might also
experience gas pains and have trouble taking
deep breaths. You will have a bloody vaginal
discharge—this is lochia— after the surgery
due to the shedding of the uterine wall. This
is the same thing that happens if you’ve
delivered vaginally. The discharge will be red
at first and then gradually change to yellow.
This is not a menstrual period. Be sure to call
your healthcare provider if you experience
heavy bleeding or a foul odor from the vaginal
discharge.
What are some of the risks involved in a
cesarean delivery?
Like any surgery, a cesarean section involves
some risks. These might include:
• Infection.
• Loss of blood or need for a blood transfusion.
• A blood clot that may break off and enter
the bloodstream (embolism).
• Injury to the bowel or bladder.
• A cut that might weaken the uterine wall.
• Abnormalities of the placenta in
subsequent pregnancies.
• Difficulty becoming pregnant.
• Risks from general anesthesia (if used).
• Fetal injury.
Can I have a baby vaginally after a
cesarean delivery?
The majority of women who have had a
cesarean delivery might be able to deliver
vaginally in a subsequent pregnancy. If you
meet the following criteria, your chances of
vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) are
greatly increased:
• A low transverse incision was made into
your uterus during your cesarean.
• Your pelvis is not too small to accommodate
a normal-sized baby.
• You are not having a multiple pregnancy.
• Your first cesarean was performed for
breech presentation of the baby.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |100Return to Table of Contents
Pain Relief Options During Childbirth
What will labor be like?
Each person’s labor is unique, and each may
experience labor discomfort differently. Pain
during labor is caused by uterine muscle
contractions and by pressure on the cervix.
Pain might also be felt from the pressure of the
baby on the bladder and bowels, and from the
stretching of the birth canal and vagina when
the baby is going through the birth canal.
The way a contraction feels is different for
everyone and might feel different from one
pregnancy to the next. Labor contractions
cause discomfort or a dull ache in your back
and lower abdomen, along with pressure in
the pelvis. Some people might also feel pain
in their sides and thighs. Some describe
contractions as strong menstrual cramps, while
others describe them as strong waves that feel
like diarrhea cramps.
The intensity of labor pain is not always why
people seek pain relief. Often it’s the repetitive
nature and length of time the pain persists
with each contraction. Sometimes, fear of the
unknown can be overwhelming when added to
the power of the contractions. Pain relief may
be just what it takes to bring some sense of
control to a laboring person.
What pain relief options are available
during childbirth?
It is important for you to learn what pain relief
options are available during childbirth. Please
discuss your options with your healthcare
provider well before delivery. Getting pain relief
should not cause you to feel guilty. You are the
only one who knows how you feel, so decisions
regarding control of your labor pain must be
made specifically by you. If your goal is a birth
without anesthesia, talk to your provider. Our
providers are able to help with this option, too.
Remember that your pain relief choices might
be governed by certain circumstances of your
labor and delivery. Throughout your labor, your
healthcare provider will assess your progress
and comfort to help you choose a pain relief
technique should you request one.
Sometime during your labor, you will have
a chance to talk with an anesthesia team
member about pain relief during labor. The
anesthetist (usually a nurse that specializes in
anesthesia) or anesthesiologist will be happy to
answer your questions. They can talk with you
about the following:
• Analgesic medicines can be injected into a
vein or a muscle to dull labor discomfort.
Analgesic medicines do not completely
stop pain, but they do lessen it. Because
analgesic medicines affect your entire body
and might make both you and your baby
sleepy, they are mainly used during early
labor to help you rest and conserve your
energy.
• General anesthesia is used for emergencies
during the birthing process. General
anesthesia induces sleep and must be
given by an anesthesiologist. Although safe,
general anesthesia prevents you from seeing
your child immediately after birth.
• Local anesthesia might be used by your
healthcare provider during delivery to numb
a painful area or after delivery when stitches
are necessary. Local anesthetic medicines
do not reduce discomfort during labor.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |101Return to Table of Contents
• Regional anesthesia (also called epidural,
spinal or systemic anesthesia) is the most
common and effective pain relief. Regional
anesthesia greatly reduces or eliminates
pain throughout the birthing process.
It can also be used if a cesarean birth
becomes necessary. It is administered by
an anesthesiologist during labor to reduce
discomfort. There are three types of regional
anesthesia: spinal, epidural and combined
spinal/epidural. With each type, medicines
are placed near the nerves in your lower
back to block pain in a wide region of your
body while you stay awake. It can also be
used if a cesarean birth becomes necessary.
For safety reasons, it is standard policy for
family members to be asked to leave the
room for regional anesthesia.
epidural
space
2012
CCF
Three types of regional anesthesia:
1. Epidural: A thin plastic tube is placed in the
back and medicine can be given through
the tube when needed. The tube is left in
place during the labor course. If a caesarean
section is needed, a stronger dose of
medicine can be given through the tube.
2. Spinal: Most commonly used in a planned
cesarean section. Local anesthetic is placed
using a single injection with a very fine
needle. This method works fast, and only
needs a small dose of anesthetic.
3. Combined Spinal-Epidural, or CSE: A
combination of the above. The spinal makes
you numb quickly, but can also be used to
give more anesthetic if needed.
How is regional anesthesia given?
Your anesthesiologist will inject medicines
near the nerves in your lower back to block the
discomfort of contractions. The medicine will
be injected while you are either sitting up or
lying on your side.
After reviewing your medical history and asking
you some questions, your anesthesiologist will
numb an area on your lower back with a local
anesthetic. A special needle is inserted into
this numb area to find the exact location to
inject the anesthetic medicine. After injecting
the medicine, your anesthesiologist removes
the needle. In most cases, a tiny plastic tube
called an epidural catheter stays in place after
the needle is removed to deliver medicines as
needed throughout labor.
When is regional anesthesia given?
The best time to administer regional anesthesia
varies depending on you and your baby’s
response to labor. If you request regional
anesthesia, your healthcare provider will
contact your anesthesiologist and together they
will discuss with you the risks, benefits and
timing of regional anesthesia. If you request
regional anesthesia, you might receive epidural
or spinal anesthesia, or a combination of the
two. Your healthcare provider will select the
type of regional anesthesia based on your
general health and the progress of your labor.
Will regional anesthesia affect my baby?
Lots of research has shown that regional
anesthesia is safe for you and for your baby.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |102Return to Table of Contents
How soon does regional anesthesia take
effect and how long does it last?
Epidural anesthesia starts working within
10 to 20 minutes after the medicine has
been injected. Pain relief from epidural
anesthesia lasts as long as your labor, since
more medicine can always be given through
the catheter.
Spinal anesthesia starts working immediately
after the medicine has been injected. Pain
relief lasts about two and one-half hours. If
your labor is expected to last beyond this time,
an epidural catheter will be inserted to deliver
medicines to continue your pain relief as long
as needed.
How numb will regional anesthesia make
me feel?
Although you will feel significant pain relief,
you might still be aware of pressure from your
contractions. You may also feel pressure when
your provider examines your cervix and when
your baby is very low in the pelvis.
Will a regional block slow my labor?
In some, contractions can slow after regional
anesthesia. Most people find that regional
anesthesia helps them to relax which may
improve their contraction pattern while
allowing rest. However, a study of 62,000
people who gave birth in the US concluded
that the second stage of labor, or pushing, was
about 30 minutes longer with an epidural than
without.
If I have regional anesthesia, will I be
able to push?
Yes. Because an epidural provides an
opportunity to rest, you may have more energy
available to push. While the sensation to push
may be dulled a bit, using a mirror can often
help you see the work that you are doing. You
may still feel some pressure from the baby
moving into the birth canal, but overall, you
will be more comfortable pushing with an
epidural in place.
Are there any side effects to regional
anesthesia?
Your anesthetist/anesthesiologist takes special
precautions to prevent complications. Although
complications are rare, some side effects might
include:
• Decreased blood pressure: You will receive
intravenous (IV) fluids, and your blood
pressure will be carefully monitored and
treated to prevent this from happening.
Occasionally, this can have an effect on
the baby. When we see this, we often
use a medication to help boost your blood
pressure.
• Mild itching during labor: If itching
becomes bothersome, your anesthesiologist
can treat it.
• Headache: Drinking fluids and taking
pain tablets can help relieve headaches
after regional anesthesia. If the headache
persists, tell your anesthesiologist and
other medicines can be ordered for you.
It is a rare complication to have a spinal
headache.
• Local anesthetic reaction: While local
anesthetic reactions are rare, they can be
serious. Be sure to tell your anesthesiologist
if you become dizzy or develop ringing in
your ears so that he or she can quickly treat
the problem.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |103Return to Table of Contents
Alternatives to regional anesthesia
Your labor team is also very happy to help you
with other options for managing the power of
your labor
• Labor tubs can be very helpful in reducing
the discomforts of labor. Feeling weightless
in the tub, or feeling the pressure of the
warm water surrounding you can make it
much easier to cope with the strength of the
contractions. If a tub doesn’t seem fitting for
you, consider laboring in the shower on a
birth ball.
• Counter pressure is a very useful tool for
making labor more manageable. Pressure
applied by your provider, partner or nurse
can make the surges of labor much less
distressing.
• Aromatherapies are also available to help
you get through your labor. Often, smells
that have a connection to comforting times
in our lives can work wonders to help us
relax and get through labor. There are also
scents that are known to improve focus and
relaxation.
• Movement and activity is encouraged for
our laboring patients. Just the simple act of
movement, either rhythmically or not, can
help to improve the perception of pain in
labor.
• Nitrous oxide is an inhaled gas that is
just like what you may get in a dentist’s
office. The gas we use in labor is not as
concentrated, but does a great job reducing
the anxiety and fear that can come with
labor. Almost 90% of women give it great
reviews!
• Narcotics for pain management are most
useful in early active labor. Because
they can make you sleepy and are given
intravenously and/or intramuscularly, they
can also make your baby a bit sleepy.
Depending on how close you are to second
stage (pushing) we may prefer to suggest
alternatives. We want your baby to greet you
with a lusty cry when they are born.
• Bring your favorite music. It is known that
music can calm us and help us to relax.
Since so much of labor takes place in our
head, this may be just what you need to get
to the next stage.
• Affirmations posted about your room can
also help give you a feeling of well-being
and strength. Write affirmations on index
cards and look at them between surges.
Your team will also remind you of your
power and strength.
More information on pain relief during
childbirth – available in 40 languages, can
be found at the Obstetric Anaesthetists’
Association (https://www.labourpains.com/
International_Translations).
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |104Return to Table of Contents
› What to expect after delivery
› Physical changes after delivery
› Vaginal tears
› Long acting reversible contraception
› Depression after the birth of a child
› Exercise after delivery
5. After Delivery
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |105Return to Table of Contents
What to Expect after Delivery
Right after birth, you may be able to hold your
baby. If possible, your baby will be placed
skin-to-skin with you for at least an hour. The
baby may search for the breast or begin to
breastfeed at this time. In most cases, your
baby will be weighed and examined in the
labor and delivery room right in front of you.
If you or your baby have special medical needs
or need special procedures during labor or
birth, a team of pediatric caregivers will be
present when your baby is born.
In some cases, your baby might need to go
to the nursery for special care. Generally,
babies stay in the nursery for a short time and
then are returned to your room. You and your
partner are welcome in the nursery to hold and
feed your baby. When you want to visit your
baby in the nursery, please ask your nurse.
After you and your baby have had time to
recover, often times you will be transferred
from the labor and delivery room to a
postpartum room. Check with your hospital
about its specific room arrangements.
Throughout your hospital stay, your heart
rate, temperature and blood pressure will be
checked often. Your healthcare provider also
will check the size of your uterus and rub
your abdomen to keep your uterus firm and to
reduce bleeding.
You will be encouraged to get up and walk
around as soon as possible.
Breastfeeding your baby
You can start to breastfeed soon after birth.
Your baby’s sucking will help stimulate your
milk flow and will stimulate the uterus to
contract to its normal size more quickly. Make
sure you feel comfortable feeding your baby
before you go home. Breastfeeding may be
natural, but it is also a skill that takes practice.
Help with breastfeeding is available. Visit
with a lactation consultant or nurse who
can observe you breastfeeding and help you
comfortably and properly feed your baby.
Getting to know your baby
The best way to learn how to take care of your
newborn is to spend a lot of time with him
or her by rooming-In. This is when your baby
stays with you and your partner in your room
from birth until you go home. Rooming-in with
your baby helps you learn your baby’s cues—
how he or she responds when hungry, tired
or wants to be held. Your healthcare provider
will probably ask you to keep a record of when
and how much (time on breast or ounces
of formula) your baby eats. Your healthcare
provider might give you a form to record this
information. It’s important to record when you
change your baby’s diaper and whether it was
urine or a bowel movement. Your nurse will
give you a form to record this information.
Your nurse can help you learn your baby’s
cues. Your partner or members of the nursing
staff can help you care for your baby if needed.
Visitors
You might want to limit visitors for the first few
hours after birth, since you and your partner
will be tired and might want to spend time
alone with your baby.
Check with your hospital regarding visiting
hours and their policy. Before holding your
baby, visitors should wash their hands to
protect your baby from germs. Please ask
visitors who are sick or have a fever, cough or
runny nose to visit the baby when they
are well.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |106Return to Table of Contents
How long will I stay in the hospital?
Check the specific laws in your state. Many
states require insurance companies, by law, to
provide coverage for 48 hours after a vaginal
birth and 96 hours after a cesarean birth. The
length of your hospital stay will depend on
the type of birth you had, and how you and
your baby are feeling. Your healthcare provider
will talk with you about you and your baby’s
readiness to go home. Together you will decide
the length of stay that’s best for you and
your baby. If your stay is less than 48 hours
(or less than 96 hours if you had a cesarean
birth), your hospital might arrange for a nurse
to come to your house to evaluate how you
and your baby are doing. Ask your healthcare
provider if this is a service that is offered.
Before you go home, your healthcare provider
will perform a physical exam and teach you
how to care for yourself and your newborn.
The healthcare provider will answer your
questions to help assure a smooth transition
for you at home.
If you have been discharged from the hospital
but your baby needs to stay for observation,
medicine, or other medical procedures, you
might be able to stay in the hospital, but in a
different room. Ask your hospital about their
specific policy.
Before you leave the hospital
Make an appointment for baby’s first checkup,
as instructed by the hospital pediatrician.
How should I prepare for our first
ride home?
As you may know, all state laws require
children less than 40 pounds to be secured in
an approved, properly used child safety seat
while being transported in a motor vehicle.
Be sure to have an infant car seat that meets
federal safety standards. It is a good idea to
bring your baby’s car seat to your hospital
room on the day of discharge. When you are
ready to go home, place your baby in the
safety seat and adjust the straps as needed.
If you need help, please ask your healthcare
provider. Put the baby’s safety seat in the
back seat of the car (facing the back of the car)
and be sure to follow the instructions on the
safety seat so that it is properly secured in your
motor vehicle.
If you have questions about child safety
seats, please call the Auto Safety Hotline at
1.888.327.4236 or refer to “Car Seat Safety”
in the Baby Care section of this book.
Follow-up visit
Within the first week after you leave the
hospital, schedule a follow-up appointment
with your healthcare provider for two weeks
post partum and another four to six weeks
after delivery. In some cases, you might need
to have an even earlier follow-up visit two
weeks postpartum and another visit four to six
weeks after delivery.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |107Return to Table of Contents
Physical Changes After Delivery
Here are some of the physical changes you
can expect:
Lochia (vaginal discharge)
Lochia is the vaginal discharge you have after
a vaginal delivery. It has a stale, musty odor
like menstrual discharge. Lochia is dark red in
color for the first three days after delivery. A
few small blood clots, no larger than a plum,
are normal. For about the fourth through 10th
day after delivery, the lochia will be more
watery and pinkish to brownish in color. From
about the seventh to 10th day through the
14th day after delivery, the lochia is creamy
or yellowish in color.
You might notice increased lochia when you
get up in the morning, when you are physically
active, or while breastfeeding. Moms who
have cesarean sections may have less lochia
after 24 hours than moms who had vaginal
deliveries. The bleeding generally stops four
to six weeks after delivery. You should wear
pads, not tampons, as nothing should go in the
vagina for six weeks.
Incision drainage
If you had a C-section or tubal ligation, it is
normal to have a small amount of pink, watery
drainage from the incision. Keep the incision
clean and dry. Wash the incision with soap
and warm water. You can bathe or shower as
usual. If the drainage doesn’t stop or develops
a thick yellow or green consistency, call your
healthcare provider.
Breast milk
When you are breastfeeding, your breasts may
leak milk. If you are unable to breastfeed, the
leaking may occur initially and will stop within
a week or two after delivery. Breast pads, worn
inside your bra, may help keep you dry.
Breast engorgement
Breast engorgement is breast swelling
characterized by a feeling of warmth, hardness
and heaviness in the breasts. Engorgement is
caused by increased circulation to the breasts.
It can happen as milk comes in or if you miss
a feeding (if you are breastfeeding).
If you are bottle-feeding your baby, you can
relieve the discomfort of engorgement by taking
pain medication as directed by your healthcare
provider. You can also apply ice packs. Wearing
a supportive bra also helps.
When breastfeeding, you can usually
prevent engorgement by frequently feeding
your baby or pumping your breasts. To relieve
the discomfort, apply warm compresses or
take a warm shower to help the milk let down
(but then feed your baby or pump immediately
after).
If you still have discomfort, you may try the
following:
• Apply ice packs.
• Express some milk before feeding.
• Use an anti-inflammatory such as ibuprofen,
as directed by your healthcare provider, to
reduce swelling.
• Wear a supportive bra.
Seek help from your healthcare provider,
lactation consultant, attend a lactation
support group, or call the lactation hotline
if this continues to be a problem for you.
If there is one area of the breast that is red
and wedge-shaped and toward the nipple,
this may mean there is an infection. Call your
healthcare provider if you suspect an infection
at any time.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |108Return to Table of Contents
Uterine contractions
Within a few hours after birth, the upper
portion of your uterus (fundus) is at about the
level of your navel. It remains there for about
a day then gradually descends each day. If you
are breastfeeding, this may occur more rapidly.
Without complications, your uterus will return
to its approximate non-pregnant size (the size
of a pear) in about six weeks.
After-pains, or cramps, are caused by uterine
contractions that stop the bleeding from
the area where the placenta was attached.
These pains are more common in women
who have had more than one pregnancy. The
discomfort can be intense—especially if you
are breastfeeding—for about five minutes, but
will gradually subside.
To relieve discomfort, you may try these
methods:
• Lie on your stomach with a pillow under
your lower abdomen.
• Take a walk.
• Take pain medication as recommended by
your healthcare provider.
• Take a sitz bath.
• Use a heating pad on your stomach.
Urination contractions
You may feel discomfort when urinating.
Discomfort is common, but be sure to tell
your healthcare provider if you feel pain or if
urinating is difficult.
Discomfort in the perineal area
If you had an episiotomy, the area of the skin
between the vagina and anus (called the
perineum) might be very sore and sensitive.
A cool compress placed on the perineum may
reduce pain and swelling during the first few
days after giving birth. To relieve discomfort,
try warm sitz baths. Sit in a tub filled with a
few inches of water. To prevent an infection,
do not add bubble bath or other products.
You can also buy a small basin that fits on
the toilet. You may also use this treatment for
discomfort associated with hemorrhoids.
Perineal care
Keeping the perineum clean will increase
comfort and prevent the risk of an infection.
After each time you use the bathroom and/or
change your pads, fill the peri bottle (a small
squeeze bottle given to you at the hospital)
with warm water. Squirt the water over the
area between your vagina and rectum in a
front-to-back motion. Pat the area dry with
toilet tissue. Do not rub the area. Apply a clean
pad often to maintain cleanliness. Continue to
do the perineal care for one week after delivery.
Incontinence
The stretching of your muscles during delivery
can cause temporary loss of urinary and
sometimes bowel control. Urinary incontinence
may occur more frequently when you laugh,
cough or strain.
Practice Kegel exercises to improve urinary
incontinence. It will improve a few weeks after
delivery. If incontinence continues to be a
problem after your first postpartum check-up,
talk to your healthcare provider.
Constipation
The first bowel movement after delivery
may be delayed until the third or fourth day
after delivery. Your healthcare provider may
prescribe or recommend an over-the-counter
stool softener to make bowel movements less
uncomfortable. Increase fruits, vegetables and
whole grains in your diet to keep your bowel
movements regular. Also, make sure you are
drinking at least 10 to 12 glasses of fluid per
day. Narcotic pain relievers may worsen the
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |109Return to Table of Contents
situation, so minimize their use, if possible.
Over-the-counter creams can help hemorrhoid
discomfort, as can sitz baths. If constipation
continues to be a problem, call your healthcare
provider.
Perspiration
Increased perspiration, especially at night, is
common after delivery as your body adjusts to
new hormone levels after delivery.
Menstruation
If you are breastfeeding, you may not get
your period (menstruate) until after your baby
weans from the breast. Please be aware that
although you may not get your period while
breastfeeding, you can still get pregnant. If you
are bottle feeding, you will usually menstruate
six to 12 weeks after delivery. The first few
periods after delivery may be irregular.
When to call your healthcare provider
after delivery
Call your healthcare provider if you have:
• A fever over 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or
severe chills.
• Foul-smelling vaginal discharge.
• Bright red bleeding that continues beyond
the third day.
• Passing of large blood clots (larger than
a plum).
• Pain, burning or trouble urinating.
• Increase in the amount of vaginal discharge
or bleeding in which you need to use more
than one sanitary pad per hour.
• Blurred vision.
• Severe headaches or fainting.
• Increased pain, redness, drainage
or separation of abdominal incision
(cesarean delivery).
• Severe pain, swelling, or redness, of one
extremity more than the other.
• Warm, red painful areas on either or
both breasts.
• Difficulty breathing.
• Any signs of postpartum depression such
as: being unable to cope with everyday
situations, thoughts of harming yourself
or your baby, feeling anxious, panicked
or scared most of the day. Please see the
“Depression After the Birth of a Child or
Pregnancy Loss” portion of the book for
more information.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |110Return to Table of Contents
Vaginal Tears (Perineal lacerations) During Childbirth
What is a vaginal tear?
A vaginal tear can happen during childbirth.
Also called a perineal laceration, this is a tear
in the tissue (skin and muscle) around your
vagina and perineum. The perineal area is
the space between the vaginal opening and
your anus.
During a typical vaginal delivery, the skin of
your vagina prepares for childbirth by thinning
out. This part of your body is meant to stretch
and allow the baby’s head and body to pass
through without trauma.
How serious are vaginal tears?
There are several different grades of vaginal
tears. These grades are determined by the
severity of the tear.
• First-degree tear: The least severe of tears,
this small injury involves the first layer of
tissue around the vagina and perineal area.
• Second-degree tear: This second level of
this injury is actually the most commonly
seen tear during childbirth. The tear is
slightly bigger here, extending deeper
through the skin into the muscular tissue
of the vagina and perineum.
• Third-degree tear: A third-degree tear
extends from your vagina to your anus.
This type of tear involves injury to the
skin and muscular tissue of the perineal
area, as well as damage to the anal
sphincter muscles. These muscles
control your bowel movements.
• Fourth-degree tear: This is the least
common type of tear during childbirth.
Extending from the vagina, through the
perineal area and anal sphincter muscles
and into the rectum, this injury is the most
severe type of tear.
What causes a vaginal tear during
childbirth?
A vaginal tear during childbirth can happen for
a variety of reasons. A few factors that could
cause a tear can include:
• If it’s your first delivery.
• The position of the baby (face-up deliveries).
• Use of forceps or a vacuum during delivery.
• A large baby (more than 8 pounds).
• If you’ve had an episiotomy.
• If you are of Asian ethnicity.
How are vaginal tears treated or repaired?
Treatment of a vaginal tear depends on the
severity of the injury. In a first-degree tear,
you may not need any stitches. In a second-,
third- and fourth-degree tear, you will receive
stitches to repair the injury. Any stitches will
dissolve on their own within six weeks. In
some of the most severe cases, your healthcare
provider may need to repair the injury to the
anal sphincter. This will also be done with
dissolvable stitches.
You may feel some discomfort in the weeks
after delivery while your tear heals. There
are a few things you can do to help ease this
discomfort. These tips work with each type
of tear.
• Use a peri-bottle (a squirt bottle) to wash
yourself clean after using the bathroom.
• Gently pat yourself dry with toilet paper
instead of wiping.
• Avoid constipation by drinking plenty of
water and using a stool softener.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |111Return to Table of Contents
Your healthcare provider may also give you
cooling pads to wear with your sanitary pad
post-delivery. These can help relieve discomfort
from your tear.
Make sure you check with your healthcare
provider before taking any pain relief
medications. What you can and can’t have
may change if you are breastfeeding.
How long does it take a vaginal tear
to heal?
Most women feel relief from any pain caused
by a vaginal tear in about two weeks. If your
tear required stitches, they will dissolve within
six weeks. You will not need to go back in to
your healthcare provider’s office to have your
stitches removed or receive any additional
treatment for the tear.
Keep an eye out for any signs of an infection
while your tear heals. These can include:
• A foul-smelling discharge.
• A fever.
• Pain that doesn’t go away even
with medication.
Some women experience pain with sex after
having a tear. If you feel any pain or discomfort
after your tear, talk to your healthcare provider.
Can an episiotomy prevent me from tearing?
An episiotomy is a procedure where the
healthcare provider makes a cut from the edge
of your vaginal opening outwards.This is meant
to widen the opening in a controlled way.
Though an episiotomy widens the vaginal
opening, it doesn’t always keep you from
tearing. An episiotomy creates risks for a more
severe tear (third- or fourth-degree). However,
there may be other reasons that an episiotomy
is necessary. Talk to your healthcare provider
about the pros and cons of this procedure.
Can I have a vaginal delivery in a
second pregnancy if I had a vaginal
tear previously?
In most cases, experiencing a tear during
one delivery doesn’t mean you will tear again
during a future delivery. Most small tears heal
well and will not prevent you from having
future vaginal deliveries. If you have had a
third- or fourth-degree tear in the past, you can
be at risk for a tear during vaginal childbirth
in the future. The risk is usually low enough
that you can still have a vaginal delivery if you
would like to. In some cases, your healthcare
provider may suggest a caesarean section
(C-section) delivery to prevent a tear.
Sources
Woolner A, Ayansina D, Bhattacharya S.
The impact of third- or fourth-degree perineal
tears on the second pregnancy: A cohort study
of 182,445 Scottish women. PLoS One. 2019;
14(4): e0215180. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC6459505/. Accessed
1/29/2020.
The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists. Assisted Vaginal Delivery.
https://www.acog.org/Patients/FAQs/Assisted-
Vaginal-Delivery?IsMobileSet=false. Accessed
1/29/2020.
American Pregnancy Association. Episiotomy.
https://americanpregnancy.org/labor-and-birth/
episiotomy/. Accessed 1/29/2020.
Leeman L, Spearman M, Rogers R. Repair
of Obstetric Perineal Lacerations. American
Family Physician. Oct 2003; 68(8): 1585-
1590. https://www.aafp.org/afp/2003/1015/
p1585.html. Accessed 1/29/2020.
National Health Service. Episiotomy and
perineal tears. https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/
pregnancy-and-baby/episiotomy/. Accessed
1/29/2020.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |112Return to Table of Contents
Smith L, Price N, Burns E. Incidence of and
risk factors for perineal trauma: a prospective
observational study. BMC Pregnancy and
Childbirth. 2013; 13:59. https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3599825/.
Accessed 1/29/2020.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |113Return to Table of Contents
Long Acting Reversible Contraception (LARC)
Long acting reversible contraception methods
include the intrauterine device (IUD) and birth
control implant (Nexplanon®).
These are highly effective in preventing
pregnancy and can last several years
depending on the method chosen. They are
easy to use as nothing needs to be done once
they are placed and they are also easy to
remove when desired. They can be placed
immediately after you have a baby or at
your follow up visit. These methods are
very effective, with fewer than one in 100
women who use it becoming pregnant (less
than 1%) per year.
This rate is in the same range as permanent
sterilization. These methods are 20 times more
effective than the pill, patch, shot or ring.
Most women can use the IUD or implant. Your
physician can discuss if these methods will
work for you.
IUDS
An IUD is a plastic, T-shaped device that is
placed into the uterus. It works by preventing
fertilization of the sperm and egg. The
hormonal IUD also thickens the cervical mucus
which makes it harder for sperm to travel and
thins out the lining of the uterus to prevent
implantation.
The postpartum period may be a convenient
time to have an IUD inserted because you are
already in the hospital. You may not feel the
insertion if you have an epidural or spinal for
labor pain management.
There are two types:
1. The hormonal IUD releases some progestin
hormone into the uterus and are approved
for 3-5 years depending on the one chosen.
2. The copper IUD does not have any hormone
and is approved for 10 years.
Possible side effects of the IUD are some
cramping and bleeding that may decrease
within the first year. The hormonal IUD may
lead to decreased bleeding or no period
over time, which is safe. Some infrequent
side effects of the hormonal IUDs can be
headaches, nausea, depression and breast
tenderness. Most of these symptoms resolve
with time.
The benefits of the IUD:
• Once placed, you do not have to do
anything further.
• It can be inserted immediately after a
vaginal or cesarean delivery or at your
postpartum visit.
• The hormonal IUD can decrease menstrual
pain and bleeding.
• All IUDs are safe with breastfeeding.
• It can be easily removed at any time and
there is no delay in attempting future
pregnancies.
The risks of the IUD:
• Uterine perforation, which means the
IUD can pierce through the wall of the
uterus. This is rare and occurs in one out
of 1,000 procedures.
• The uterus may expel the IUD. This can
occur in 5% of cases in the first year,
but up to 10-20% if placed immediately
postpartum.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |114Return to Table of Contents
• PID (pelvic inflammatory disease) is
an infection of the uterus and fallopian
tubes. It is rare and occurs in fewer than
one in 100 women.
• Increased risk of an ectopic pregnancy
(pregnancy not in the uterus) if pregnancy
occurs, which is rare.
NEXPLANON (The implant)
Nexplanon is a single flexible rod that is
inserted under the skin in the upper arm.
It releases the hormone progestin to prevent
pregnancy. It is effective for up to three years.
This hormone prevents ovulation, which
prevents pregnancy.
Possible side effects are unpredictable
bleeding, which generally improves with time.
Some individuals may notice mood changes,
headaches and acne.
The benefits of the rod are:
• Once it is placed, you do not have to do
anything for up to three years.
• It can be easily removed if desired.
• It is safe with breastfeeding.
• It can be placed postpartum while you are
in the hospital or at your postpartum visit.
The potential risks are:
• Difficulty removing the implant which can
occur in less than 2% of women.
• If a woman becomes pregnant with the rod
in place, which is rare, there is a slightly
higher risk of an ectopic pregnancy.
Most insurances will cover the implant and
the IUD.
References
1) Immediate Postpartum Long-Acting
Reversible Contraception. Committee
Opinion No. 670, August 2016. The
American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists
2) Hatcher RA, Trussell J, Nelson AL, Cates
WJ, Kowal D, Policar MS. Contraceptive
Technology. 20th rev. ed. New York: Ardent
Media; 2011
3) Gurtcheff SE, Turok DK, Stoddard
G, Murchy PA, Gibson M, Jones KP.
Lactogenesis after early postpartum use of
the contraceptive implant: a randomized
controlled trial. Obstetrics & Gynecolog
2011;117:1114-21
4) Dahlke JD, Terbstra ER, Ramseyer AM,
Busch JM, Rieg T, Magann EF. Postpartum
Insertion of Levonorgestrel-intrauterine
system at three time periods:a prospective
randomized pilot study. Contraception
2011;84:244-8.
5) Chen BA, Reeves M, Hayes JL, Hohmann
HL, Perriera LK, Creinin MD. Postplacental
or delayed insertion of the levonorgestrel
intrauterine device after vaginal delivery:
a randomized controlled trial. Obstetrics
& Gynecology 2010;116:1079-87.
6) Up to Date: Intrauterine Contraception:
Devices, Candidates and Selection,
updated 6/30/17.
7) Up to Date: Etonorgestrel Contraceptive
Implant, updated 11/4/16
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |115Return to Table of Contents
Depression after the Birth of a Child or Pregnancy Loss
What is postpartum depression?
Postpartum depression is a complex mix of
physical, emotional and behavioral changes
that occur after giving birth and are attributed
to the chemical, social and psychological
changes associated with having a baby.
Who is affected by postpartum depression?
Postpartum depression is common. As many
as 75% of new mothers experience the
“baby blues” after delivery. Up to 15% of
these women will develop a more severe and
longer-lasting depression—called postpartum
depression—after delivery.
One in 1,000 women develop the more serious
condition called postpartum psychosis.
What factors increase my risk of being
depressed after the birth of my child?
• Having a personal or family history of
depression or premenstrual dysphoric
disorder (PMDD).
• Limited social support.
• Marital conflict.
• Ambivalence about the pregnancy.
• A history of depression during
pregnancy—50% of depressed pregnant
women will have postpartum depression.
Types of postpartum depression
Postpartum blues: Better known as the “baby
blues,” this condition affects between 50%
and 75% of women after delivery. If you
are experiencing the baby blues, you may
experience frequent, prolonged bouts of crying
for no apparent reason, sadness and anxiety.
The condition usually begins in the first week
(one to four days) after delivery. Although the
experience is unpleasant, the condition usually
subsides within two weeks without treatment.
All you’ll need is reassurance and help with the
baby and household chores.
Postpartum depression: This is a far more
serious condition than postpartum blues,
affecting about one in 10 new mothers. If
you’ve had postpartum depression before, your
risk increases to 30%. You may experience
alternating emotional highs and lows, frequent
crying, irritability and fatigue, as well as
feelings of guilt, anxiety, and inability to care
for your baby or yourself. Symptoms range
from mild to severe and may appear within
days of the delivery or gradually, even up to a
year later.
Although symptoms can last from several
weeks up to a year, treatment with therapy or
antidepressants is very effective.
Postpartum psychosis: This is an extremely
severe form of postpartum depression and
requires emergency medical attention. This
condition is relatively rare, affecting only one
in 1,000 women after delivery. The symptoms
generally occur quickly after delivery and
are severe, lasting for a few weeks to several
months.
Symptoms include severe agitation,
confusion, feelings of hopelessness and
shame, insomnia, paranoia, delusions or
hallucinations, hyperactivity, rapid speech,
or mania. Postpartum psychosis requires
immediate medical attention since there
is an increased risk of suicide and risk of
harm to the baby. Treatment will usually
include admission to hospital for the mother
and medicine.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |116Return to Table of Contents
What causes postpartum depression?
More research is needed to determine the
link between the rapid drop in hormones after
delivery and depression. The levels of estrogen
and progesterone (the female reproductive
hormones) increase tenfold during pregnancy
but drop sharply after delivery. By three
days postpartum, levels of these hormones
drop back to pre-pregnant levels. In addition
to these chemical changes, the social and
psychological changes associated with having
a baby create an increased risk of postpartum
depression.
If you have had any of the following symptoms,
please notify your healthcare provider right
away:
• Thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.
• Recurrent thoughts of death or suicide.
• Depressed mood for most of the day, nearly
every day for the last two weeks.
• Feeling anxious, guilty, hopeless, scared,
panicked or worthless.
• Difficulty thinking, concentrating making
decisions, or dealing with everyday
situations.
• Loss of interest or pleasure in most of the
activities during the day nearly every day for
the last two weeks.
If you do have any of the previous symptoms,
your healthcare provider may ask you the
following two questions:
1. Over the past two weeks, have you felt
down, depressed or hopeless?
2. Over the past two weeks, have you felt little
interest or pleasure in doing things?
If you answer yes to either one, your healthcare
provider will administer a more in-depth
depression screening.
Can postpartum depression be prevented?
Here are some tips that can help prevent, or
help you cope with postpartum depression:
• Be realistic about your expectations for
yourself and your baby.
• Limit visitors when you first go home.
• Ask for help. Let others know how they can
help you.
• Sleep or rest when your baby sleeps.
• Exercise. Take a walk and get out of the
house for a break.
• Screen your phone calls.
• Follow a sensible diet. Avoid alcohol
and caffeine.
• Keep in touch with your family and friends.
Do not isolate yourself.
• Foster your relationship with your partner.
Make time for each other.
• Expect some good days and some bad days.
Treating postpartum depression
Postpartum depression is treated differently
depending on the type and severity of the
woman’s symptoms. Treatment options include
anti-anxiety or antidepressant medicines,
psychotherapy and support group participation.
In the case of postpartum psychosis, medicines
used to treat psychosis are usually added.
Hospital admission is also usually necessary.
If you are breastfeeding, don’t assume that you
can’t take medicines for depression, anxiety
or even psychosis. Speak to your healthcare
provider about your options.
What is the outlook?
With professional help, almost all women who
experience postpartum depression are able to
overcome their symptoms.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |117Return to Table of Contents
Exercise after Delivery
Light to moderate intensity walking is
appropriate for most people who are recovering
from childbirth. Typically, if you’re ready to
start a fitness routine, you should check with
your healthcare provider to make sure it’s safe
for you to begin exercising, especially if you
have had a C-section.
If your goal is weight loss, consistent exercise
and a healthy diet are the best ways to lose
weight and return to your pre-pregnant weight.
But don’t over-do it. A one- to two- pound
weight loss per week is the healthiest rate of
weight loss. It’s not uncommon for it to take up
to 12 months for you to return to your previous
weight. Breastfeeding mothers should consume
at least 1,800 calories per day (source: La Leche
League, 2010; Lauwers & Swisher, 2015).
Here are some questions you can think about
before choosing an exercise routine:
• What physical activities do I enjoy?
• Do I prefer group or individual activities?
• Are there any activities I can do with
my baby?
• What programs best fit my schedule?
• Do I have physical conditions that limit my
choice of exercise?
• What goals do I have in mind? (e.g., losing
weight, strengthening muscles or improving
flexibility)
How do I get started?
When starting out, you should plan a routine
that is easy to follow and stay with. As the
program becomes more routine, you can vary
your exercise times and activities.
• Choose an activity you enjoy. Exercising
should be fun and not a chore. You might
even be able to include your baby. Try
jogging or walking with the stroller, and
think of your little bundle of joy as a
12-pound weight. Exercise can double
as playtime.
• Schedule regular exercise into your daily
routine. Add a variety of exercises so you do
not get bored.
• Abdominal exercises will be most effective
after six weeks.
• Stick with it. If you exercise regularly, it will
soon become part of your lifestyle.
• If you feel you need supervision or medical
advice to begin an exercise program, ask
your healthcare provider.
• A general rule after C-sections is to not lift
weights heavier than your baby (six to 10
pounds) in the first six to eight weeks.
Stop exercising and call your doctor if
you have:
• Severe or chronic pain.
• Increased vaginal bleeding.
• Faintness.
• Nausea.
• Shortness of breath.
• Extreme fatigue and muscle weakness.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |118Return to Table of Contents
› The benefits of breastfeeding
› 24 hour rooming-in
› Skin-to-skin contact for you and your baby
› Breastfeeding the first weeks
› Over the counter meds and breastfeeding
› Contraception during breastfeeding
6. Breastfeeding
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |119Return to Table of Contents
The Benefits of Breastfeeding for Baby and for Mom
Breastfeeding: Healthier for baby
Breastfed babies have:
• Stronger immune systems.
• Less diarrhea, constipation, gastroenteritis,
gastroesophageal reflux (GERD) and preterm
necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC).
• Fewer colds and respiratory illnesses like
pneumonia, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
and whooping cough.
• Fewer ear infections, especially those that
damage hearing.
• Fewer case of bacterial meningitis.
• Better vision and less retinopathy
of prematurity.
• Lower rates of infant mortality.
• Lower rates of Sudden Infant Death
Syndrome (SIDS).
• Less illness overall and less hospitalization.
• Parents have up to six times less
absenteeism from work.
• Less risk of developing celiac disease.
Breast milk provides abundant and easily
absorbed nutritional components, antioxidants,
enzymes, immune properties and live
antibodies from mother. Mother’s more mature
immune system makes antibodies to the germs
to which she and her baby have been exposed.
These antibodies enter her milk to help protect
her baby from illness. Immunoglobulin A coats
the lining of the baby’s immature intestines
keeping germs and allergens from leaking
through. Breast milk also contains substances
that naturally soothe infants.
Breastfed babies may become healthier
children with:
• Fewer instances of allergies, eczema
and asthma.
• Fewer childhood cancers, including
leukemia and lymphomas.
• Lower risk of type I and II diabetes.
• Fewer instances of Crohn’s disease
and colitis.
• Lower rates of respiratory illness.
• Fewer speech and orthodontic problems.
• Fewer cavities.
• Reduce risk for obesity in childhood.
• Improved brain maturation.
Teens and adults will find benefits for life:
• Less likely to develop rheumatoid arthritis
and lupus.
• Less likely to develop heart disease
in adulthood.
• Lower risk of multiple sclerosis.
• Lower rates of pre- and postmenopausal
breast cancers.
Breastfeeding: Healthier for
mom physically
• Promotes faster weight loss after birth,
burning about 500 extra calories a day to
build and maintain a milk supply.
• Stimulates the uterus to contract and return
to normal size.
• Less postpartum bleeding.
• Fewer urinary tract infections.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |120Return to Table of Contents
• Less chance of anemia.
• Less risk of postpartum depression and
more positive mood.
• Greater immunity to infection.
Healthier emotionally
• Breastfeeding produces the naturally
soothing hormones oxytocin and prolactin
that promote stress reduction and positive
feelings in the nursing mother.
• Increased confidence and self-esteem.
• Increased calmness. Breastfed babies cry
less overall, and have fewer incidences of
childhood illness. Breastfeeding can support
the wellness of body, mind and spirit for the
whole family.
• Breastfeeding makes travel easier.
Breast milk is always clean and the
right temperature.
• Physical/emotional bonding between
mother and child is increased.
Breastfeeding promotes more skin-to-skin
contact, more holding and stroking. Many
feel that affectionate bonding during the
first years of life help reduce social and
behavioral problems in both children
and adults.
• Breastfeeding mothers learn to read their
infant’s cues and babies learn to trust
caregivers. This helps shape the infant’s
early behavior.
Benefits for life
Breastfeeding may result in:
• Lower risk of breast cancer.
• Lower risk of ovarian cancer.
• Lower risk of thyroid cancer.
• Lower risk of endometrial cancer.
• Lower risk of rheumatoid arthritis and lupus.
• Less endometriosis.
• Less osteoporosis with age.
• Less diabetes.
• Less hypertension, decreases blood pressure.
• Less cardiovascular disease.
Studies also show, the longer mothers
and infants breastfeed, the more benefit
they receive.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |121Return to Table of Contents
24-Hour Rooming-In: Rest is Healing
Having a baby is exciting, exhausting work.
That’s why it’s called “labor.”
Mothers and babies belong together. Twenty-
four hour rooming-in is provided as part of our
family- centered care to help you learn how to
rest and care for your newborn.
Twenty-four hour rooming-in helps you prepare
for going home with your new baby. Many
women welcome the idea of getting as much
sleep as possible after labor, and it can be
tempting to send your baby to the nursery to
get some rest. However, research shows you
are just as likely to get the same amount of
rest with your baby in the room. Having your
baby with you right from the beginning is
shown by research to be the best way for you
and your baby to rest and establish a routine.
This is a wonderful time to get to know and
connect with your new baby. Babies recognize
their parent’s voice, smell, and heartbeat.
Having your baby within your presence helps
your baby relax. Twenty-four hour rooming-in
helps you prepare for going home with your
new baby and offers more opportunities to
learn about your baby’s behaviors and what
they mean.
24-Hour Rooming-In Benefits for Mother:
• Better quality sleep.
• Increased confidence in handling and caring
for baby.
• Ability to learn what your baby’s cues
are (sleepy, stressed, in need of quiet time
or hungry).
• Earlier identification of early feeding cues
(rooting, opening mouth, and sucking on
tongue, fingers or hand).
• Improved breastfeeding experience.
• Less infant crying and distress (they love to
be near you).
• Less “baby blues” and postpartum depression.
• Parents are better-rested and more relaxed
by the end of the first week home.
• Increases opportunity for skin-to-skin contact.
24-Hour Rooming-In Benefits for Baby:
• Better quality sleep. Your baby will
develop a more regular sleep-wake cycle
earlier, and may help ease the transition
to day/night routines.
• More stable body temperatures.
• Generally more content, less crying.
• More stable blood sugar.
• Breastfeed sooner, longer, and more easily.
• Lower levels of stress hormones.
• Babies exposed to normal bacteria on
mother’s skin, which may protect them
from becoming sick due to harmful germs.
The best advice we can give new parents is
to learn how to rest when your baby sleeps
day and night in the first days. Early in the
newborn period, babies eat frequently, and
find comfort and security in being close to
you. Learning how to feed your infant can be
easier when you learn to read your baby’s early
hunger cues and sleep/awake states. Keeping
baby with you helps you learn how to feed and
care for them while our expert staff is close by
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |122Return to Table of Contents
to assist you.
To further meet the needs of all patients and
families, Cleveland Clinic offers 24-hour
visitation. We encourage you to think ahead
about what your wishes will be during your
hospital stay. Do you prefer to have round
the clock visitors, or will you choose to limit
visitors to close family and specific times of the
day? We are glad to help you set boundaries
in order to help you rest and recover during
these first hours and days after delivery. Some
parents put a note on their door requesting
privacy to rest and bond. Other moms have a
code phrase to indicate to their partner they
are tired and want help asking visitors to leave.
Whatever your wishes, it is our goal to provide
you with the best possible care while preparing
you to care for your newborn at home. Please
let us know how we can best assist you.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |123Return to Table of Contents
Skin-to-Skin Contact for You and Your Baby
What is meant by “skin-to-skin”?
Skin-to-skin means your healthy baby is
placed belly-down, directly on your chest,
right after birth. Your care provider dries your
baby off, puts a hat on him or her, covers him
or her with a warm blanket, and gets your
baby settled on your chest. The first hours
of snuggling skin-to-skin let you and your
baby get to know each other. They also have
important health benefits including regulation
of their vital signs.
If your baby needs to meet the pediatrician
first, or if you deliver by C-section, you can
unwrap your baby and cuddle shortly after
birth. If necessary, your partner can do the
initial skin to skin. Newborns crave skin-to-skin
contact, but it’s sometimes overwhelming for
new moms. It’s OK to start slowly as you get to
know your baby.
Breastfeeding
Keep your baby skin-to-skin as much as
possible. Snuggling gives you and your baby
the best start for breastfeeding. Research
studies have shown that babies who have had
the benefit of skin-to-skin breastfeed better.
They also continue to keep nursing an average
of six weeks longer.
The American Academy of Pediatrics
recommends that all breastfeeding babies
spend time skin-to-skin right after birth.
Keeping your baby skin-to-skin in the first
few weeks makes it easy to know when to
feed your baby, especially if your baby is a
little sleepy.
A smooth transition
Your chest is the best place for your baby to
adjust to life in the outside world.
Compared with babies who are swaddled or
kept in a crib, skin-to-skin babies stay warmer
and calmer, cry less, and have healthier blood
sugar levels.
Bonding
Skin-to-skin cuddling may affect how you
relate with your baby. Researchers have
watched mothers and infants in the first few
days after birth, and they noticed that skin-
to-skin moms touch and cuddle their babies
more. Even a year later, skin-to-skin moms
snuggled more with their babies during a visit
with the pediatrician.
Skin-to-skin beyond the delivery room
Keep cuddling skin-to-skin after you leave
the hospital. Your baby will stay warm and
comfortable on your chest, and the benefits for
bonding, soothing, and breastfeeding will likely
continue. If your baby is sleepy, skin-to- skin
can help keep your baby interested in nursing.
Partners can snuggle, too. Parents who hold
babies skin-to-skin help keep them calm and
cozy. Babies are comforted by skin- to-skin
during procedures. Skin-to-skin may enhance
brain development. Fathers and mothers who
hold babies skin-to-skin are thought to have
increased confidence and are more relaxed.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |124Return to Table of Contents
Breastfeeding: The First Weeks
Getting started
The first weeks of breastfeeding are a learning
time for you and your baby. You are learning
how to care for and feed your baby, and your
baby is discovering how to breastfeed and
ask for comfort. Be patient. Over the next
days and weeks, both of you will learn how
to breastfeed. Help with breastfeeding is
available. Your care team (nurse, lactation
consultant, physician) will help you and your
baby breastfeed before you leave the hospital.
You may call for assistance any time of day.
During the first weeks, your milk will change
from colostrum (a thick, rich fluid) to mature
milk (a thinner, whitish fluid). This happens
gradually.
Your milk provides all the food and fluid your
baby needs.
A good start with breastfeeding
• We encourage you to put your baby to breast
after birth.
• Keep your baby with you so you can
breastfeed often (24-hour rooming-in).
• Breastfeeding provides comfort as well
as nutrition to your baby. Offer your breast
whenever your baby shows feeding cues
such as mouthing, lip smacking, turning
toward the breast, sucking on fists. Feeding
on cue or on demand will assure good milk
supply because baby’s nursing drives the
milk supply.
• Newborns breastfeed often. The average is
eight to 12 feedings per day.
• Breastfeeding is different for every baby
and mother. If it is painful, please call for
assistance. Oftentimes, the latch is shallow
instead of deep.
• The more you breastfeed, the more milk
you will make for your baby. Frequent nipple
stimulation sends hormones to produce
• Once you and your baby learn how to
breastfeed, breastfeeding will be a good time
to relax and enjoy each other. more milk.
Where should I breastfeed my baby?
Select a quiet, comfortable place to breastfeed.
If you’d like, pour yourself a glass of water
or juice to drink while you are breastfeeding
your baby.
Choose a chair with arm support and put your
feet on a stool to bring your baby closer to you.
Or try lying down on your side. Use pillows on
your lap or under your arms to support your
baby and avoid straining your back.
If you are in pain, take medicine before
breastfeeding to help make you more
comfortable.
How should I hold my baby?
Hold your baby close to you, tummy to tummy.
Your baby’s whole body should face your body.
Remove your baby’s clothing, except for
the diaper. Hold him or her as close to you
as possible, skin-to-skin contact is best.
Keep your baby’s head higher than his or
her stomach.
Here are two examples of positions to hold
your baby while learning to breastfeed. Choose
a position that is comfortable for both you and
your baby.
Cross-Cradle Position
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |125Return to Table of Contents
During the early weeks, many mothers find
a variation of the cradle position, called the
cross-cradle position, to be useful. For this
position, your baby is supported on a pillow
across your lap to help raise him/her to your
nipple level.
Pillows should also support both elbows so
your arms don’t hold the weight of the baby;
they will tire before the feeding is finished.
If you are preparing to breastfeed on the left
breast, your left hand supports that breast in
a “U” hold. You support your baby with the
fingers of your right hand. Do this by gently
placing your hand behind your baby’s ears and
neck with your thumb and index finger behind
each ear. Your baby’s neck rests in the web
between the thumb, index finger and palm of
your hand, forming a “second neck” for baby.
The palm of your hand is placed between your
baby’s shoulder blades. As you prepare to latch
on your baby, be sure your baby’s mouth is
very close to your nipple from the start. Aim
the nipple toward the nose. When baby opens
his/her mouth wide, you push with the palm of
your hand from between the shoulder blades.
Your baby’s mouth will be covering at least a
half inch from the base of your nipple.
Clutch or Football Position
This is a good position for a mother who has
had a cesarean birth, as it keeps the baby
away from the incision. Most newborns are
very comfortable in this position. It also helps
when a mother has a forceful milk ejection
reflex (let down) because the baby can handle
the flow more easily. In the clutch position, you
support your baby’s head in your hand and his
back along your arm beside you.
You support your breast with a “C” hold. Your
baby is facing you, with his/her mouth at
nipple height.
Your baby’s legs and feet are tucked under your
arm with his/her hips flexed and his/her legs
resting alongside your back rest so the soles
of his/her feet are pointed toward the ceiling.
(This keeps your baby from being able to push
against your chair.) Pillows help bring the baby
to the correct height.
How should I position my baby on
my breast?
Hold your breast with one hand. Place your
thumb on top of your breast and four fingers
underneath, away from the dark area around
the nipple (areola).
When your baby’s mouth is open wide (like
a yawn), quickly bring your baby onto your
breast, leading with the lower lip and baby’s
head tilted slightly back.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |126Return to Table of Contents
Check your baby’s mouth position to make
sure the bottom lip is rolled out. Your baby’s
chin should be touching your breast. Your
baby’s mouth will be about one inch behind
the nipple and on the areola, not on the nipple.
In this position, place your baby’s lower arm
around your waist. Your baby’s head will rest
in the bend of your arm, with your forearm
supporting your baby’s back, and your hand
holding your baby’s buttocks. Support your
breast with the other hand. Place your hand
behind your baby’s neck, and rest your baby’s
back on your forearm. Support your breast
with your other hand. You will feel a tugging
at your breast.
This should not be painful. If it hurts, break
suction (gently slip your finger into the corner
of your baby’s mouth) and try to latch your
baby on your breast again.
How do I know when my baby is
getting milk?
Changes in your baby’s sucking pattern will
help you know when your milk lets down or is
released. Your baby will begin with rapid, short
sucking motions. Soon after you will notice a
slower, steady sucking pattern and will hear
your baby swallow. “Kuh” are swallow sounds
you may hear.
How often should I breastfeed?
Feed your baby on demand every one to three
hours during the day and night. Most newborns
need to breastfeed about eight to 12 times
per day. Your baby might want to nurse every
hour or so for several feedings (this is called
cluster feedings).
Let your baby breastfeed for as long as your
baby is nursing vigorously longer on the first
breast until he or she seems satisfied. There
is no need to limit the length of the feedings
unless your nipples are sore. Burp your baby
and then offer your other breast.
It is OK if your baby does not feed at both
breasts during each feeding.
Start on the other breast at the next feeding.
How do I know if my baby is getting
enough milk?
By one week of age, be sure your baby has had
at least six to eight wet diapers and three to
four large, yellow, seedy stools every 24 hours.
The urine should be pale in color after the first
week. If your baby is not getting enough milk,
the urine will become deep yellow in color and
the amount will decrease.
If it’s hard to tell if your baby is wet, place
a square of toilet paper on top of the diaper.
When your baby urinates, the toilet paper will
be wet. Some diapers have a line that changes
color when there is urine in the diaper.
Breastfed babies have yellow, seedy, loose
stools, often with each feeding. Later on,
some breastfed babies might only have one
stool per week.
To see if your baby is gaining enough weight,
weight checks are available at your local
breastfeeding support groups or you can call
your healthcare provider’s office.
Breast care
Wash your hands before breastfeeding. A bath
or shower once a day is all you need to keep
your nipples clean. Do not use soap or other
products when washing your nipples. Use
warm water only. Allow your nipples to dry
after a feeding.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |127Return to Table of Contents
How can I avoid sore nipples?
Sore nipples are common in the first
weeks and are often caused by poor latch
or positioning. To avoid sore nipples, follow
these guidelines:
• Make sure your baby’s mouth is opened
wide (like a yawn) before he or she latches
onto your breast.
• Change your position for breast feeding.
• Be sure the baby’s mouth is latched deeply
to prevent soreness.
• Rub colostrum or breast milk into your
nipple and areola after each feeding, let
air dry.
• If your nipples are sore and dry or cracking,
start breastfeeding with the less sore breast
first.
• Use acetaminophen (such as Tylenol®), an
anti-inflammatory (such as ibuprofen), or
other pain medicine, as prescribed by your
healthcare provider, for short-term relief.
If your nipples remain sore or are painful, call a
lactation consultant.
When can I introduce bottles?
Do not introduce bottles until you and your
baby are comfortable with breastfeeding. In
fact, some families never use bottles at all.
After the first three to four weeks, once you
and your baby have become comfortable with
breastfeeding, bottles can be introduced. It
might help if someone other than you feeds
your baby the first bottle.
You might choose to pump your breasts and
use this breast milk for an occasional or
regular bottle feeding. The American Academy
of Pediatrics recommends exclusive breast
milk feeding for the first six months of life,
continuing with complementary food through
the first two years of life and beyond.
If you will be returning to work, call a
lactation consultant or breastfeeding
medicine physician two to four weeks
before you return to work to discuss your
options. You may also find information at
womenshealth.gov/breastfeeding.
Are supplements necessary?
There is no need for supplements in the first
weeks for healthy, full-term babies, unless
recommended by your provider. In fact, avoid
supplements, as they will decrease your milk
supply. Frequent emptying of the breast is
important to establish your milk supply.
Avoid artificial nipples, pacifiers and bottles
for the first four weeks, as they might decrease
your milk supply.
Your baby controls your milk supply by feeding
often. As your baby grows, there will be times
when he or she breastfeeds more than usual,
and this will increase your milk supply.
How can I take care of myself the first
weeks after delivery?
Get enough rest. Whenever the baby is
sleeping, you should rest, too. Let your family
and friends help with older children and house
chores. Your job during the first weeks is to get
to know your new baby.
Good nutrition remains important. Follow the
same guidelines for healthy eating as you
did during pregnancy. Remember, eating well
keeps you healthy. Your healthcare provider
might recommend that you continue to take a
prenatal vitamin while you are breastfeeding.
If you are uncomfortable from delivery, take
the pain medicines as directed by your
healthcare provider. Pain can make
breastfeeding more difficult, since it can
interfere with your milk letting down. Pain
medicines prescribed by your healthcare
provider will not harm your baby.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |128Return to Table of Contents
Ask your healthcare provider or lactation
consultant about the safety of any medicine
you might need to take while breastfeeding.
Most prescription drugs or over-the-counter
medicines are safe to take while breastfeeding.
Common concerns about breastfeeding
Are my breasts too small to breastfeed?
Breast size does not affect your ability to
breastfeed. The amount of milk your breasts
make mostly depends on the amount your
baby feeds as well as certain medical
conditions and the amount of glandular tissue
you have. If you have any questions about your
risk factors for low supply or have a history
of low supply, talk to your OB, a lactation
consultant, or one of our breastfeeding
medicine specialists.
Will breastfeeding hurt?
Breastfeeding should not hurt if your baby is
latched onto your breast well. Your healthcare
provider can help you learn how to hold your
baby when you breastfeed for the first time.
Your breasts might be tender the first few
days, but this soreness should go away as you
continue to breastfeed.
Is breastfeeding hard to do?
Breastfeeding is a learned skill and takes
practice, but the health benefits you are
gaining for you and your baby are worth
it. Help with breastfeeding is available.
There are many ways for you to learn
about breastfeeding. Many hospitals offer
breastfeeding classes that you can attend
during pregnancy. In most cases, nurses and
lactation consultants are also available to give
you information and support. Talking to other
breastfeeding moms might be helpful and
make you feel more comfortable.
I am shy and think breastfeeding might
embarrass me.
You can choose to feed your baby in private.
Or, you can breastfeed in front of others
without them seeing anything. You can wear
shirts that pull up from the bottom, just
enough for your baby to reach your breast. You
can put a blanket over your shoulder or around
your baby so no one can see your breast.
Do I have to drink milk if I choose
to breastfeed?
No, you do not have to drink milk to make
breast milk. Other sources of calcium-rich
foods include yogurt, cheese, tofu, salmon,
almonds, calcium-enriched fruit juice, corn
tortillas, leafy green vegetables, broccoli, and
dried beans and peas. Eat four servings of
calcium-rich foods every day to provide proper
nutrition for you and your baby.
What if I need to go out?
If you can take your baby with you, your baby
can eat when he or she is hungry. If you need
to be away from your baby, you can learn to
pump or “express” your milk and store it so
that someone else can feed your baby.
How can I breastfeed when I go back
to work?
When you return to work, you can learn to
pump or “express” your milk and store it so
that someone else can feed your milk to your
baby while you’re at work.
For more information on breastfeeding
for working mothers, go to:
https://www.womenshealth.gov/
supporting-nursing-moms-work/
what-law-says-about-breastfeeding-and-work.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |129Return to Table of Contents
Will breastfeeding take too much time?
Feeding your baby takes time, no matter which
method you choose. Your choice to breastfeed
is a personal one. We encourage you to discuss
your concerns with your healthcare provider or
a lactation consultant.
How can the dad or partner bond with
the baby if I am breastfeeding?
Dad or partner can provide skin-to-skin
contact, which is a loving way to bond and to
give the new mother some time for herself.
Dad or partner can also take the baby for a
walk in a front carrier or a sling and help with
basic baby care.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |130Return to Table of Contents
Over-the-Counter Medicines and Breastfeeding
Is it safe to take over-the-counter medicines
while I am breastfeeding my baby? The
answer is usually “yes.” To provide some
simple background information about this
topic, briefly, here are some known facts about
medicine and breast milk:
• Nearly all medicines taken by a mother
pass into human milk, but only in very
small amounts—usually less than 1% of
the dosage taken by the mother.
• Because only a very small amount
even passes into milk, there are very few
drugs that shouldn’t be taken by a
nursing mother.
• In most cases, nursing mothers do
not need to interrupt breastfeeding to take
prescription or over-the-counter medicines.
In the rare situation when you should not
take a drug, you may try an alternative drug,
a non-drug, or a procedure.
Two simple general rules of thumb that can
help you determine if it is safe to take a
medicine during breastfeeding are as follows:
• If a drug is commonly prescribed for infants,
it is likely safe to take while nursing, since
the baby would generally receive a lower
dose from breast milk than from taking the
drug directly.
• Drugs considered safe to take during
pregnancy are, with few exceptions, safe to
take while nursing.
Are there any additional safety measures
to consider while breastfeeding?
Even though most medicines are safe to
take during breastfeeding, some additional
safeguards to lower any potential risk even
further include:
• Take the lowest possible dose for the
shortest possible time.
• Avoid extra-strength formulas. Also avoid
“sustained-release” preparations and
medicines taken only once or twice a day.
These are considered long-acting drugs and
remain in the mother’s blood stream and
milk supply much longer than drugs that
need to be taken more frequently.
• When possible, use single ingredient
preparations rather than multi-symptom
formulas.
• Watch for signs of a possible drug reaction
in your baby such as sleepiness, rashes,
diarrhea or colic. Although such reactions
rarely occur, call your healthcare provider
if you see such changes.
• Finally, always read the medicine labeling
and package insert for any precautions
or warnings about taking the drug while
breastfeeding. Never hesitate to call your
doctor, the baby’s pediatrician, a lactation
consultant or your pharmacist if you have
any concerns about taking a medicine while
you are breastfeeding.
Which medicines are not safe to take
while breastfeeding?
Some of the medicines that require temporary
weaning are those that contain radioactive
compounds and drugs used to treat cancer.
Most of the drugs that raise any concern at all
are prescription drugs, not over the-counter
medicines.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |131Return to Table of Contents
For more information on unsafe medications
that are geared to nursing mothers, please visit
the United States National Library of Medicine,
LactMed, which contains over 450 drug
records. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/ databases/
download/lactmed.html.
If I am a smoker, can I continue to smoke
and breastfeed?
Not smoking would be the best choice for your
personal health and the health of your baby.
However, if you can’t quit, try to cut down. If
you smoke less than a half a pack a day, the
risks to the baby are small. Of course, the
fewer cigarettes you smoke, the smaller the
chance of encountering problems. Nicotine in
large doses can cause low milk supply, a poor
letdown reflex, and GI upset in some babies
(for example, resulting in nausea/ vomiting,
abdominal cramps and diarrhea).
If you must smoke:
• Don’t smoke around the baby, and smoke
after you nurse.
• Wash your hands and face after smoking.
• Cover your hair and change your clothes.
• Do not smoke indoors.
Can I safely drink alcohol while
breastfeeding?
Occasional or light drinking—such as a glass
of wine or a beer—has not been found to be
harmful to a breastfeeding baby. Erring on the
conservative side, wait at least two hours for
every drink you consume before nursing your
baby. Or alternatively, use expressed milk to
feed your baby after consuming alcohol.
Also, consider choosing drinks low in alcoholic
content or that are diluted with water or juice.
Moderate-to-heavy alcohol consumption by
a breastfeeding mother has been shown to
interfere with the let-down reflex, inhibit
milk intake, affect the baby’s motor skill
development, slow weight gain, inhibit growth
and cause drowsiness in the baby.
Can I safely drink coffee while
breastfeeding?
Drinking up to two 5-ounce cups of coffee per
day does not appear to cause any problems for
a mother and nursing baby. Drinking more than
this amount can result in an irritable or fussy
baby and a baby with poor sleeping habits.
Some babies are sensitive to any amount
of caffeine.
Remember to consider the amount of caffeine
you drink from all of your beverages, including
coffees, teas, colas and even chocolate.
Consider cutting back or switching to
decaffeinated beverages.
Please consult your healthcare provider
for advice.
What are common misconceptions
parents have about breastfeeding?
1. That it’s easy or natural.
Learning to breastfeed is often a skill that
takes practice for both mom and baby but
the learning process can be made easier
with support.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |132Return to Table of Contents
2. I’m not making enough milk for my baby
because my baby is feeding every hour.
It is very common for babies to cry for
reasons other than hunger. It is important
to look for hunger signs and rule out other
reasons for crying. It is also normal for
babies to cluster feed and feed frequently
(every hour in the first weeks of life). It’s
important to follow with your pediatrician
to determine if baby is growing appropriately.
3. My full milk supply will come in right
away and baby needs large volumes of
milk right away.
Milk initially comes in as colostrum - a
thick yellow substance, complete with a
number of infection-fighting cells in smaller
amounts and increases in volume as your
infant’s stomach increases in size. In most
normal milk physiology, milk will come
in on days 3-5 but may be affected by
other factors, such as parity, c-section,
preeclampsia, etc.
4. If I can’t fully breastfeed right away I
should just quit.
We encourage moms to seek support from
their pediatrician, lactation consultants, or
breastfeeding medicine experts. We can
often help you overcome initial challenges
that are common in the early weeks and
eventually reach your breastfeeding goals.
Is there any way I may know before
delivery if I am at increased risk of
breastfeeding challenges and how should
I prepare?
Women with the following risk factors are
encouraged to make an appointment with a
lactation consultant or breastfeeding medicine
specialist prenatally to better prepare for their
breastfeeding journey:
History of:
• Difficulties with breastfeeding with
previous child.
• Low or loss of milk production.
• Oversupply.
• Breast surgeries.
• Maternal diagnoses that may interfere
with breastfeeding (thyroid disorders,
breast cancer, polycystic ovarian
syndrome (PCOS), high blood pressure,
diabetes, obesity).
Currently:
• Pregnant with multiples.
• Maternal medications that may affect milk
supply/production and mother/baby.
• Anticipated infant diagnoses that may
hinder breastfeeding (facial defects, Down
Syndrome, congenital heart defects).
• Wide-spaced breasts, conical shaped
breasts, or signs of insufficient
glandular tissue.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |133Return to Table of Contents
What resources does Cleveland Clinic
offer for support before delivery and once
I get home?
We offer a variety of breastfeeding medicine
and lactation services support to fit your needs.
We offer in-person and virtual one-on-one
visits with lactation consultants. We also offer
in-person and virtual one-on-one visits with our
physician breastfeeding medicine specialists.
We also offer prenatal classes related to
breastfeeding and a number of in person and
virtual support group options.
Please visit
www.clevelandclinicchildrens.org/breastfeeding
to find the most up-to date offerings and
information on how to schedule.
Breastfeeding resources in Florida:
Cleveland Clinic Martin Health
Lactation consultants:
772.223.5945, ext. 11665
Breastfeeding Support Groups:
772.345.8188
Baby Café:
772.223.5945, ext. 11665
Cleveland Clinic Indian River Hospital
Healthy Start lactation consultants:
772.567.4311, ext. 1277 or 1278
Indian River County
Health Start Coalition classes:
www.irchealthystartcoalition.org/events
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |134Return to Table of Contents
Contraception During Breastfeeding
I’ve heard that you can’t get pregnant
while you breastfeed. Is that true?
Not necessarily. During breastfeeding, the
chance of getting pregnant is lower. However,
women can still get pregnant.
When should I start using contraception?
It’s a good idea to discuss contraception
with your clinician before you give birth.
Breastfeeding women have many birth
control options.
Non-hormonal methods of contraception
• Condoms and spermicides: These can
be used with no impact on breastfeeding.
The vagina of the nursing mother might
be dryer than normal, which can make
condoms irritating. If this is a problem,
use additional lubrication.
• Barrier methods: These methods, such as
the diaphragm and cervical cap with
spermicides, have no effect on breastfeeding.
Check with your clinician to refit the device
because you might need a larger device after
having a child.
• The intrauterine device (IUD) non
hormonal: This type of IUD is a copper-
containing device (ParaGard®). The IUD
does not affect the quality and quantity of
breast milk. ParaGard IUD is safe and
effective for 10 years.
• Tubal sterilization: This is a surgical,
permanent form of birth control, known
as having your tubes tied that only
affects breastfeeding if general anesthesia is
required. (That means you are put to sleep
for the operation.) Anesthetic medicine can
pass through the breast milk.
Hormonal methods of contraception
• Progestin-only oral contraceptives, or The
Mini-Pill, contain only progestin (a female
hormone). The method, when used daily,
is highly effective for breastfeeding women.
This method of contraception has a slightly
higher failure rate than oral contraceptives
(OCs) containing both estrogen and
progestin. During breastfeeding, however,
women are not as fertile. A small amount
of hormone passes into the breast milk but
has no known bad effects on the infant.
Indeed, some studies have suggested a
good effect on the quantity and quality
of breast milk. When the woman stops
breastfeeding the baby, or when menses
returns, some clinicians suggest switching
to combination OCs, which have a slightly
higher effectiveness.
• Combination oral contraceptives, or The
Pill contain both estrogen and progestin.
The American Academy of Pediatrics
has approved the use of low-dose OCs in
breastfeeding women once milk production
is well established.
• NuvaRing® contains estrogen and
progestin, but with a lower systemic
absorption than OCs.
• The intrauterine device (IUD) hormonal:
This type of IUD is a progesterone-
containing device. The IUD (Mirena®)
releases a very small amount of hormone
into the uterus, where it works locally. This
IUD does not affect the quality and quantity
of breast milk. The Mirena IUD is safe and
effective for five years.
• Medroxyprogesterone: This is an injection
or shot that can be safely used during
breastfeeding and does not suppress
milk production.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |135Return to Table of Contents
• Nexplanon: This is a hormone-releasing
implant that is placed under the skin.
Nexplanon is effective for three years.
Remember. If you are at risk for a sexually
transmitted infection (STI), use condoms to
protect yourself.
Sexually transmitted infections can happen
to anyone who is sexually active, even during
breastfeeding. Don’t stop taking or using your
birth control method on your own. Always call
your clinician to talk things over.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |136Return to Table of Contents
› Safe sleep
› Newborn care in hospital
› Newborn appearance
› Newborn behavior
› Your baby and when to call doctor
› Umbilical cord appearance and care
› Circumcision
› Childhood immunizations
› Adding your baby to your insurance policy
› Are you looking for a Pediatrician
› Choosing a car seat
7. Baby Care
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |137Return to Table of Contents
Safe sleep for your baby
› Always place your baby on his or her back to
sleep, for naps and at night, to reduce the risk
of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS).
› Use a firm sleep surface, covered by a fitted
sheet, to reduce the risk of SIDS and other
sleep-related causes of infant death.
› Your baby should not sleep in an adult bed,
on a couch, or on a chair alone, with you or
with anyone else.
› Keep soft objects, toys and loose bedding
out of your baby’s sleep area to reduce the
risk of SIDS and other sleep-related causes of
infant death.
› To reduce the risk of SIDS, women should:
› Get regular health care during pregnancy, and
› Not drink alcohol or use illegal drugs during
pregnancy or after the baby is born.
› To reduce the risk of SIDS, do not smoke during
pregnancy, and do not smoke or allow smoking
around your baby.
› Breastfeed your baby to reduce the risk of SIDS.
› Offer a pacifer, not attached to a string,
at nap and sleep time once breastfeeding
is established.
› Do not let your baby get too hot during sleep.
› Follow health care provider guidance on your
baby’s vaccines and regular health checkups.
› Avoid products that claim to reduce the risk
of SIDS and other sleep-related causes of
infant death.
› Do not use home heart or breathing monitors
to reduce the risk of SIDS.
› Give your baby plenty of tummy time
when he or she is awake and when someone
is watching.
Remember Tummy Time!
Place babies on their stomachs when they are
awake and when someone is watching. Tummy
time helps your baby’s head, neck and shoulder
muscles get stronger and helps to prevent flat
spots on the head.
www.SafeSleep.Ohio.gov
Alone.
Always put me in my crib alone.
I shouldn’t sleep in your bed or
have anyone else in mine.
Back.
Always put me on my back to
sleep – at night or even when
I’m just napping.
Crib.
Always make sure the only thing on
my firm mattress is a fitted sheet.
No blankets. No stuffed animals.
Ohio Department of Health
A B C
Safe sleep
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |138Return to Table of Contents
What Does a Safe Sleep
Environment Look Like?
Reduce the Risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) and Other Sleep-Related Causes of Infant Death
Alone.
Always put me in my crib alone.
I shouldn’t sleep in your bed or
have anyone else in mine.
Back.
Always put me on my back to
sleep – at night or even when
I’m just napping.
Crib.
Always make sure the only thing on
my firm mattress is a fitted sheet.
No blankets. No stuffed animals.
Ohio Department of Health
A B C
Use a firm sleep
surface, such as
a mattress in a
safety-approved*
crib, covered by
a fitted sheet.
Do not use
pillows, blankets,
sheepskins or
crib bumpers
anywhere in your
baby’s sleep area.
Keep soft objects,
toys and loose
bedding out
of your baby’s
sleep area.
Do not smoke
or let anyone
smoke around
your baby.
Make sure
nothing covers
the baby’s head.
Always place your
baby on his or her
back to sleep, for
naps and at night.
Dress your baby in
light sleep clothing,
such as a one-piece
sleeper, and do not
use a blanket.
Baby should not
sleep in an adult
bed, on a couch,
or on a chair
alone, with you or
with anyone else.
* For more information on crib safety guidelines, contact the
Consumer Product
Safety Commission at 1.800.638.2772 or www.cpsc.gov. www.SafeSleep.Ohio.gov
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |139Return to Table of Contents
Newborn Care in the Hospital
After your baby is born, a doctor or nurse will
perform a series of tests to determine your
baby’s physical condition. A routine evaluation,
called the Apgar test, is used to identify
whether your baby needs urgent medical care.
After delivery, your baby will also receive a
vitamin K shot, eye drops, hearing test and
newborn screening tests. Your baby may
also receive a hepatitis B vaccine, with your
permission.
What happens during an Apgar test?
During an Apgar test, your baby’s heart rate,
breathing, reflex response, muscle tone, and
skin coloration are measured. These five signs
are evaluated at one minute after birth and at
five minutes after birth. Each test is given a
score between zero and two, and the results
are added together to make up the Apgar score.
What does the Apgar score mean?
If your baby has an Apgar score of seven or
more, he or she is probably in good physical
condition. A baby rarely scores a perfect 10,
because his or her skin color may be slightly
blue until he or she warms up. A low Apgar
score may indicate problems with your baby’s
heart or lungs. It may also be the result of
a difficult labor. Your baby may be in good
physical condition, but have a low score
immediately after birth. Premature babies
may score low because of immature
development in the womb. Keep in mind
that your baby’s Apgar score does not predict
his or her future health.
Why does my baby need a vitamin
K shot?
Your baby will typically have low levels of
vitamin K when he or she is born. Vitamin K
is needed for blood clotting, so your baby will
usually receive a vitamin K shot immediately
after birth. This will help prevent a rare
but serious bleeding problem known as
hemorrhagic disease of the newborn.
Why does my baby need eye drops?
Your baby will receive antibiotic eye ointment
or eye drops to prevent bacterial infections that
he or she may pick up at birth.
What are newborn screening tests?
All newborns are screened for certain
conditions. With early detection, these
conditions can be prevented or treated.
Your baby’s heel will be pricked and a
sample of blood taken to test for many
different conditions.
See the handout, “Why Must My Baby be
Screened?” by the Ohio Newborn Screening
Program at https://odh.ohio.gov/wps/portal/gov/
odh/know-our-programs/Newborn-Screening/
Program-Details/.
For information on Florida newborn screening,
visit www.floridanewbornscreening.com.
Why does a newborn need a hearing test?
A hearing screen of all newborns is the gold
standard of care across the United States.
Early treatment of hearing loss can prevent
future speech and language problems. A small
earphone or microphone will be placed in
your baby’s ears to see how your baby’s brain
responds to sounds. Your baby needs to be
asleep for this test to be accurate. If your baby
does not pass, it does not mean he or she has
hearing loss, but the test will be repeated.
What is newborn screening for critical
congenital heart disease (CCHD)?
Critical congenital heart disease is a group of
heart or vascular problems present at birth.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |140Return to Table of Contents
Approximately 11 out of 10,000 babies
are born with CCHD. CCHD may be life
threatening and may require intervention in
infancy. It is not always detected prenatally or
upon exam in the nursery. To improve the early
detection of CCHD, it is recommended the
screening be added to the newborn screening
before discharge to home. A pulse oximeter
designed for newborns is used to screen for
CCHD. A sensor is wrapped around the hand
and another sensor is placed on either foot.
Pulse oximetry newborn screening can identify
some infants with CCHD before they show
signs of the condition.
Why does a newborn need a hepatitis
B vaccine?
The hepatitis B vaccine protects against the
hepatitis B virus, which causes liver damage.
The hepatitis B vaccine is a series of three
shots. Your baby will usually receive the first
shot after delivery, and the next two shots by
18 months of age.
Why is it important to lie my baby on his
or her back to sleep?
Prevention of sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS) begins in the newborn nursery. Placing
infants on their backs to sleep has reduced the
rate of SIDS almost 50% in the last 12 years.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |141Return to Table of Contents
Newborn Appearance
Talk with your healthcare provider about some
of the things you should expect about the
appearance of your new baby. This list might
help set your mind at ease, especially after the
birth of your first child.
You can expect:
• The umbilical cord stump to remain for the
first 10 to 14 days, but it might not fall off
until the third week.
• Baby’s skin to appear dry and peeling.
• Fine hair on baby’s body. Some fine hair
might cover certain parts of baby’s body,
such as the shoulders, back, temples, or
ears. This hair protects your baby in the
uterus and is usually shed within the first
week after baby’s birth.
• Your baby’s breasts to be swollen for two
to four weeks. This happens in boys and
girls and is caused by estrogen in the
mother’s placenta.
• Your baby’s head to be swollen, either on
top or as a smaller lump in different places
on the skull. This is caused either from
fluid forced into the scalp at birth or from
the baby rubbing up against the mother’s
pelvic bones. Swelling at the top of the
head should go down within a few days,
while swelling from friction will go down
within two to three months. Call your
doctor if swelling increases or lasts longer
than normal.
• Your baby’s legs to be bowed or feet turned
up. This is caused by being held tightly in
the womb. Your baby’s legs will straighten
out within six to 12 months.
• Swollen genitals in both boys and girls.
Boys might have swollen scrotums, lasting
six to 12 months, or the hymen in girls
might be swollen, disappearing within two
to four weeks.
• An undescended testicle. A small percentage
of boys might have an undescended testicle.
They will more than likely need surgery later
to correct this.
• A shiny and red penis. If your son was
circumcised (the foreskin on the penis
was removed), the glans of his penis will
appear shiny and red, and might ooze some
yellowish fluid. The glans should heal within
seven to 10 days.
• Vaginal discharge. Baby girls might have
a vaginal discharge that is clear, white or
pink that lasts for three to 10 days. This
is normal and is caused by the estrogen
passed to the baby from your womb.
• Eye appearance. Sometimes a blood vessel
in the white of the eye will break during
birth. This is not uncommon and should
heal within two to three weeks. A baby’s
tear duct can become blocked, making the
eye continuously water. This will usually
clear up within the first year of life, but
be sure to ask your child’s doctor at the
next visit, or call the doctor immediately
if the eye looks infected or has pus or a
yellow drainage.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |142Return to Table of Contents
Newborn Behavior
Many new parents might not know what is
considered normal newborn behavior. Babies
develop at different rates, but they still
display many of the same behaviors. Don’t be
alarmed if your baby seems a little behind. It
is important to know what kind of behaviors to
expect from your newborn so that you can tell
if there is a problem.
If your baby was born prematurely, don’t
compare his or her development to that of
full-term newborns. Premature babies are often
developmentally behind full-term babies. If
your baby was born two months early, then he
or she might be two months behind a full-term
baby. Your doctor will follow the developmental
progress of your premature baby. Contact your
doctor if you think your baby is developing at
an unusually delayed rate.
Sleeping
Newborn babies usually sleep 20 minutes to
four hours at a time, up to 20 hours a day.
Their stomachs are too small to keep them
full for long, so they need to be fed every few
hours. Babies have different sleeping habits,
but at three months most babies sleep six to
eight hours a night.
Crying
Newborns might cry for several hours a day. It
is their way of telling you they need something
or that something is wrong. Newborns cry
when they:
• Are hungry.
• Are tired.
• Are too cold or too hot.
• Need their diaper changed.
• Need to be comforted.
• Have gas.
• Are over-stimulated.
• Are sick.
It is also common for newborns to hiccup,
sneeze, yawn, spit up, burp and gurgle.
Sometimes newborns cry for no reason at all.
If this happens, try comforting your baby by
rocking, singing, talking softly, or wrapping him
or her in a blanket. Soon you will be able to tell
what your baby needs by how he or she cries.
You might not always be able to comfort your
newborn. This is not your fault. Try to be
patient and remain calm when your newborn
does not stop crying. If necessary, have
someone else stay with your baby while you
take a break. Never shake your baby under any
circumstance. Shaking your baby can cause
serious brain damage, known as shaken baby
syndrome, resulting in lifelong disabilities.
Contact your doctor if your newborn cries more
than usual, cries at a different time of day than
usual, or if the crying sounds different than
usual. These might be signs that your newborn
is sick.
Reflexes
During their first few weeks, newborns
maintain the position they had in the womb
(fetal position): clenched fists; bent elbows,
hips, and knees; arms and legs close to the
front of the body. This will change when
your baby develops more control over his
or her movements.
Newborns have several natural reflexes.
Understanding these reflexes will help
you understand the cause of some of your
newborn’s behaviors.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |143Return to Table of Contents
Newborn reflexes include the following:
• The rooting reflex: The newborn turns in
the direction of food and is ready to suck.
Stroking a newborn’s cheek will cause this
response.
• The sucking reflex: If you place an object in
a baby’s mouth, the baby naturally begins
to suck.
• The startle response: The baby throws out
his or her arms and legs and then curls
them in when startled. This response often
includes crying.
• The tonic neck reflex: The baby turns his or
her head to one side and holds out the arm
on the same side.
• The grasp reflex: The baby’s fingers close
tightly around an object placed in his or
her palm.
• The stepping reflex: The baby’s feet imitate
a stepping action when he or she is held
upright with the feet touching a hard
surface.
• Note: A baby’s arms, legs, and chin might
tremble, especially when crying. This occurs
because newborns’ nervous systems are not
fully developed.
Breathing
It is not uncommon for newborns to experience
irregular breathing. This is when newborns
stop breathing for five to 10 seconds and then
immediately begin breathing again on their
own. This is normal. However, you should call
your doctor or take your baby to the emergency
room if he or she stops breathing for longer
than 10 seconds or begins to turn blue.
Vision
Newborns can see, but their eyes might be
crossed because it is hard for them to focus
at first. Newborns can see movement and the
contrast between black and white objects. For
the first couple of months, it is easier for them
to look at things at an angle. By two to three
months, babies have more control of their eye
muscles and are able to focus their eyes on
one thing. They can also follow objects with
their eyes.
Hearing
Newborns can distinguish between different
sounds. They recognize familiar voices, so you
should talk to your baby often. You might soon
find that your baby turns toward the sound of
your voice. To newborns, language sounds like
music with different tones and rhythms.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |144Return to Table of Contents
Your Baby: When to Call the Doctor
During your baby’s first year, you will make
many trips to the pediatrician’s office. Most of
these visits are routine, but there may be times
when your baby needs immediate medical
attention. Questions about minor problems
such as a small cough, occasional diarrhea,
and fussiness can usually wait until normal
office hours. However, if your baby is acting
unusually, do not hesitate to call your doctor
immediately. Trust your instincts, because they
are usually right.
It is very important to get medical advice from
your doctor because something as simple as
diarrhea may turn into a dangerous condition.
Before your baby is born, be sure to find out
your doctor’s office hours, on-call hours, and
how to deal with an after-hours emergency.
This will make it easier to deal with any
problems that may come up.
Before calling your doctor, make sure to have a
pen and paper to write down any instructions
he or she might give. When you call, have the
following information on hand:
• Your baby’s immunization records.
• The names and doses of any medications,
prescriptions and over-the-counter products
your baby takes.
• Any medical problems your baby may have.
• His or her temperature.
Call 911 or find the nearest emergency
department immediately if your baby:
• Has difficulty breathing.
• Is limp or not able to move.
• Will not wake up.
• Has blood in his or her vomit or stool.
• Has a seizure.
• Has any type of poisoning.
• Has bleeding that you cannot stop.
When should I call the doctor?
Call your doctor’s office quickly if your baby:
• Has a rectal temperature of 100.4 degrees
Fahrenheit or higher.
• Has yellow skin or eyes.
• Sleeps more than usual.
• Refuses to feed for several feedings in a row.
• Has vomiting or diarrhea more than usual.
• Shows signs of dehydration (decreased
number of wet diapers - should have six to
eight per day; does not shed tears when
crying; or the soft spot on top of his or her
head is sunken).
• Has a cold that does not improve over several
days, or gets worse.
• Has ear drainage.
• Will not stop crying.
Remember that you know your baby best. If
you are extremely concerned about your baby,
always call your doctor or 911 and/or take your
baby to the emergency room.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |145Return to Table of Contents
Umbilical Cord Appearance and Care
What is the umbilical cord?
The umbilical cord is the baby’s lifeline to the
mother during pregnancy. The cord transports
nutrients to the baby and also carries away the
baby’s waste products. It is made up of two
arteries and one vein.
What does the umbilical cord look like?
The umbilical cord is a flexible, tube-like
structure that has a spongy appearance. The
cord is surrounded in a jelly-like substance.
After birth, the cord is clamped and then cut,
leaving a stump behind. In about a week, the
stump withers and falls off. The stump changes
in color from yellowish- green to brown to
black before falling off.
How do I take care of my newborn’s
umbilical cord?
It is important to keep the cord clean in order
to prevent infection. Bathing the cord in water
does not increase the rate of infection or make
the stump take longer to fall off. Allow the
cord to dry naturally. There is no need to apply
topical substances such as alcohol.
Some additional tips
When diapering the baby, make sure to fold
the edge of the diaper down so that the cord
can dry. Some newborn diapers have a special
cut-out cord area.
Allow the stump to fall off on its own. Never
try to pull off the stump, even if it seems to be
dangling or hanging. Pulling off the stump may
result in unnecessary bleeding and harm to
your baby.
Watch for signs of infection, which may include
redness and inflammation. In some cases,
there may be colored discharge or bleeding.
Call your baby’s doctor right away if you
suspect an infection.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |146Return to Table of Contents
Circumcision
What is circumcision?
Circumcision is the surgical removal of the
foreskin, the sheath of tissue covering the head
of the penis. It is an ancient practice that has
its origin in religious rites. Today, many parents
have their sons circumcised for religious or
other reasons.
How is circumcision done?
During a circumcision, the foreskin is freed
from the head of the penis (glans), and the
excess foreskin is clipped off. If performed on a
newborn, the procedure takes about five to 10
minutes. Adult circumcision takes about one
hour. The circumcision generally heals in five
to seven days.
When is circumcision done?
If circumcision is chosen to be done in the
hospital, it’s usually performed on the first or
second day after birth.
Is circumcision necessary?
The use of circumcision for medical or health
reasons is an issue that continues to be
debated. The American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP) believes that circumcision has potential
medical benefits and advantages, as well as
risks. The procedure is not essential to a child’s
current well-being. AAP recommends that the
decision to circumcise is one best made by
parents in consultation with their pediatrician,
taking into account what is in the best interests
of the child, including medical, religious,
cultural and ethnic traditions. Parents should
talk with their doctors about the benefits and
risks of the procedure before making a decision
regarding circumcision of their sons.
What are the benefits of circumcision?
There is some evidence that circumcision has
medical benefits, including:
• A slightly decreased risk of urinary
tract infections.
• A slightly reduced risk of sexually transmit-
ted infections (STIs) in men.
• Possible protection against penile cancer
and a reduced risk of cervical cancer in
female sex partners.
• Prevention of balanoposthitis (inflammation
of the glans and foreskin).
• Prevention of phimosis (the inability to
retract the foreskin) and paraphimosis (the
inability to return the retracted foreskin to its
original location).
• Circumcision also makes it easier to keep
the end of the penis clean.
What are the risks of circumcision?
• Bleeding.
• Infection.
• Injury to head of penis.
Note: Some studies show that good hygiene
can help prevent certain problems with the
penis, including infections and swelling, even
if the penis is not circumcised.
In addition, practicing safe sex is an important
factor in reducing the risk of STIs and other
infections.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |147Return to Table of Contents
Childhood Immunizations
What is immunization?
Immunization is a way to protect your child
from getting a number of illnesses. Many of
these illnesses are easily spread from child to
child and can cause serious health problems.
They can even cause death.
During their first two years of life, children
should be given vaccines (medicines) to protect
them from:
COVID-19
Diphtheria
Haemphilus influenzae type B (Hib disease)
Hepatitis A
Hepatitis B
Influenza (flu)
Mumps
Pertussis (whooping cough)
Pneumococcal disease
Polio
Rotavirus
Rubella (German measles)
Rubeola (measles)
Tetanus (lockjaw)
Varicella (Chickenpox)
These vaccines are very safe and have saved
thousands of children from getting sick. For
more information and a parent’s guide to
Childhood Immunization, visit the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
at www.cdc.gov/vaccines.
When should my child get immunized?
Children should get immunized during their
first two years of life. Your child must get
several doses of the vaccines to be fully
protected. For example, healthcare providers
recommend that children receive their first
dose of MMR (measles, mumps, rubella)
vaccination at 12 months of age or older
and a second dose prior to elementary school
entry (around four to six years of age). Children
can get the vaccines at regularly scheduled
well visits.
How are the vaccines given?
Most vaccines are given as shots.
Are the vaccines safe?
Yes. Vaccines for childhood diseases are very
safe. Sometimes, a vaccine will cause mild
side effects such as a sore arm or leg, or
low fever.
A bad side effect is not likely to happen.
Childhood diseases are a greater health risk to
children than the vaccines. Ask your healthcare
provider to tell you about risks and side effects.
When should a child not be vaccinated?
In a few cases, it’s better to wait to get a
vaccine. Some children who are very sick
should not get a vaccine at all. Reasons
that you should wait or not get a vaccine
might include:
• Being sick with something more serious
than a cold.
• Having a bad reaction after the first dose of
a vaccine.
• Having a convulsion (sudden jerky body
movements) that is thought to be caused by
a vaccine.
If my child is over two years old, can my
child still be vaccinated?
Yes. Vaccines can be given to older children
and adults. Children are vaccinated early in life
so they have less chance of getting sick. The
types of vaccines might be different for older
children. Talk to your healthcare provider about
how you and your child can be vaccinated.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |148Return to Table of Contents
Should I get vaccinated if I plan to
get pregnant?
If you don’t know if you have ever had German
measles (rubella) or varicella (chickenpox) or if
you were not vaccinated for these, talk to your
healthcare provider about getting the vaccines.
If a pregnant woman gets German measles or
varicella during pregnancy, her baby can be
born with birth defects. However, you should
not get these vaccines if you plan to get
pregnant within the next month or if you are
already pregnant. They can instead be given
after you deliver, sometimes even during your
postpartum hospital stay.
Why should I bother with vaccines?
Thanks to vaccines, childhood diseases are
less common. But these diseases can still be
caught, and they can be deadly. Children still
suffer from choking, brain damage, paralysis
(being unable to move parts the body), heart
problems, blindness and other health problems
because of childhood diseases.
In most states, children must be immunized
from childhood diseases before they can enter
school. It is very important to keep a record of
your child’s immunizations. This record is an
important part of his or her health history.
Where can I get more information?
National Immunization Program Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention
1.800.CDC.INFO 1.800.232.4636 or go to:
www.cdc.gov/vaccines.
Or, call your local public health department.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |149Return to Table of Contents
Adding Your Baby to Your Insurance Policy
What You Need to Know
Having a child is a qualifying life event that
allows you to add him or her as a dependent
on your health plan. To add your baby to your
health plan, take these steps to ensure your
child is covered:
Step 1. Enroll in MyChart if you haven’t
already done so to review and manage
your account. To learn more, visit
clevelandclinic.org/MyChart.
Quickly after your baby is born, you will receive
a proof-of-birth letter in your MyChart account.
This letter serves as the documentation
required for most newborn events (like health
insurance coverage, beginning FMLA, and etc.)
until a birth certificate is later available. You
will be able to download and print or email this
letter as needed soon after birth.
Step 2. Contact your employer or your health
plan as soon as possible - within 30 days - to
add your child to your policy.
If the child is being added to both parents’
insurance plans, both insurance companies
must be informed of the child’s eligibility under
multiple plans. This is known as Coordination
of Benefits.
When a child is covered under both parents’
plans, the plan of the parent whose birthday
comes first in the calendar year is the primary
insurance coverage. The other parent’s
insurance is considered secondary. For
example, if mom’s birthday is April 2nd and
dad’s birthday is November 17th, mom’s plan
is primary and dad’s plan is secondary. This is
known as the Birthday Rule.
Step 3. Contact Cleveland Clinic Customer
Service at 216.445.6249 to provide your
child’s insurance information once your child
is covered so we can update our records.
Step 4. Bring a copy of the insurance card
to your child’s next visit or email a copy to
insurancecard@ccf.org.
Step 5. Enroll in MyChart as your child’s proxy
to view and manage their account. To learn
more, visit clevelandclinic.org/MyChart.
Don’t have insurance through your employer?
Speak with a Patient Financial Advocate to
learn about your options. Visit clevelandclinic.
org/PFAcallback or call 855.831.1284.
If your plan requests hospital documentation
to add the child to your policy, please contact
Health Information Management:
• Akron General -
himakronopsfax@ccf.org
• Hillcrest and Fairview Hospital -
216.444.5580
Someone will be available during your
postpartum stay to answer any questions and
offer assistance.
If you have commercial insurance and deliver
in one of our Florida hospitals, please call
your insurer’s member services number to add
your baby to your insurance plan. If you have
Medicaid, our patient access team members
will help you start the process before you
are discharged.
For questions about adding your baby to your
insurance policy after discharge, please call the
Patient Access Office at these hospitals:
For Cleveland Clinic Martin North Hospital
or Cleveland Clinic Tradition Hospital:
772.345.8105.
For Cleveland Clinic Indian River Hospital:
772.567.4311, ext. 2450.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |150Return to Table of Contents
Are you looking for a pediatrician?
Not sure where to start looking?
Don’t sweat it.
We’ll help you find the right
one for you and your family.
Visit our “Find a Doctor” tool:
(Scan with your mobile phone’s camera)
It’s easy to search our
100+ pediatricians at
40+ convenient locations
throughout Northeast Ohio.
BUSY? (OF COURSE YOU ARE!)
You can also schedule instantly online by selecting a
pediatrician at clevelandclinicchildrens.org/pediatricians,
or if you already have a pediatrician through MyChart®.
Can’t get to the doctor’s office? Our pediatricians also
offer virtual visits. Something a little more urgent? Make
an on demand virtual visit with MyClevelandClinic for
minor illnesses, such as pink eye, rashes or coughs/colds.
Download the mobile app today! clevelandclinic.org/app.
Download our “What to Expect from Your Pediatrician Guide”
at clevelandclinicchildrens.org/pedsguide.
SUBSCRIBE TO OUR eNEWSLETTER
For useful, trustworthy tips for you and your family
from Cleveland Clinic Children’s,
visit clevelandclinicchildrens.org/HEnews.
clevelandclinicchildrens.org
216.444.KIDS
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |151Return to Table of Contents
Choosing a car seat
Why is it important to choose the right
car seat?
Choosing a car seat for your newborn is one of
the most important things you’ll do before your
baby arrives. By law, you will need to have a
properly installed car seat in your car before
you can take your baby home. There are many
brands and types of car seats available, and
it will take time and effort to decide which is
suitable for your child. Here are some things
to consider.
What should I look for in a child car seat?
You should look for a car seat that best fits
your child and your vehicle. Not all car seats
are the same and they don’t all work in every
type of car. The car seat that you choose
should be based on the height and weight
of your child. To determine this, you should
test the seat to make sure it fits your baby
and your vehicle properly. To ensure that
you are properly installing the car seat, read
the manufacturer’s instructions carefully or
contact a certified car seat technician in
your neighborhood.
Is a more expensive car seat better?
Cost should not be your only guide in choosing
a seat. All seats meet the same safety
standards and are required to pass the same
crash tests. A more expensive car seat usually
has extra features, but this doesn’t necessarily
make it safer or easier to use.
Can I buy a used car seat?
Car seat safety regulations change often, so
you should not buy a used car seat if at all
possible. You should never use a seat that
has been in a crash, has missing parts, or is
damaged in any way. It is also difficult to tell
if a seat has been stored improperly or has
been involved in an accident, so purchasing
a used seat without knowing its history is not
recommended.
No matter what seat you buy, you should
carefully read the instructions from the
manufacturer. You can obtain user instructions
online or from the seat manufacturer. You
should also register your seat with the
manufacturer and have the seat checked
for recalls.
How should the car seat fit my child?
Infant and young child car seats should
have a five-point harness seat belt for safety,
with each point being a spot where the belt
attaches to the car seat. There are two points
of attachment at the shoulder (one at each
shoulder), two points at the hips (one at each
hip), and one point where the harness buckles
between the legs. For shoulder straps, the
point of attachment to the car seat should
always be at or just below your baby or child’s
shoulder height (most car seats allow you to
adjust the height of the car seat back in order
to create the proper shoulder belt height).
Shoulder harness straps should also have a
harness (retainer) clip that holds the shoulder
straps in place across the chest. This harness
clip should be fastened across the chest at
armpit level and be adjusted to remain in this
position once the straps are tightened, The
remaining clips buckle into the portion of the
buckle between baby’s legs. Once all clips
are buckled into place, the straps should be
tightened so that you are not able to “pinch”
any loose belt between your fingers when
attempting to do so by positioning one finger at
just above and the other finger just below the
collar-bone level.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |152Return to Table of Contents
What types of car seats are available?
There are four types of child car seats,
including:
• Rear-facing or infant-only.
• Convertible.
• Combination.
• Booster.
There are also seats and harnesses made
specifically for special needs children.
Each type of seat has specific features that
work for the stage of life your child is currently
in. Different seats also have different weight
restrictions and limits. Make sure you always
look at the manufacturer’s information that
comes with the seat before purchasing a car
seat. These instructions will help you know
what seat is best for your child at any stage
of life.
• Infant-only seat: Infant-only seats are also
known as rear-facing seats. A rear-facing
position is the safest position for infants
and young children. For the best possible
protection, keep your child rear-facing in
the back seat of the vehicle for as long as
possible. It’s recommended that children
remain rear-facing up to 3 years of age. The
seat should recline at about a 45 degree
angle and should never be placed in front of
an air bag. Harness strap height should be
at the child’s shoulder level or just below.
Most infant seats are manufactured with a
higher end rear-facing weight limit. Do not
exceed the maximum height or weight of
your rear-facing seat. If your child exceeds
the limits, you will need to move the child to
a convertible seat in the rear-facing position.
• Convertible seat: Convertible seats are
essentially two car seats in one. They are
placed in the back seat and should be rear-
facing until your child is about 3 years of
age and at least 20 pounds (though many
of these seats allow for much higher rear-
facing weights). Following that, the seats
are turned around to face the front of the
car. Once the seat is made forward-facing,
shoulder strap heights should be set to just
above your child’s shoulder level.
• Combination seat: Combination sears are
placed in the back seat and face the front
of the car. These are intended for children
who are at least one year older and weigh
approximately 20 to 40 pounds. These
seats can also convert into a belt-positioning
booster seat when your child weighs at least
40 pounds or more and is at least four years
of age. These seats should not be used
rear-facing.
• Booster seat: Booster seats are intended
for children who are four to eight years old
and are at least 4’ 9”. Your child should
start using a booster seat when he or she
grows out of his or her car seat (when his
or her ears are higher than the back of the
car seat, and his or her shoulders are higher
than the top strap slots), or when the weight
limit for the seat is reached. Booster seats
are usually used until your child is at least
eight years old and 4’ 9” tall. They are then
ready to use a regular seat belt sitting in the
back seat of the car.
Do you have to have a car seat?
While many state laws are different and some
don’t require children over age four to ride in
a child restraint system, your child is safest
when using a car seat. Young children who
don’t ride in some kind of restraint system are
unprotected from serious injury. The general
rule is to keep children in an appropriate car
seat until the child is 4’9”.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |153Return to Table of Contents
When can my child use a seat belt?
Your child is ready to use a standard car seat
belt when he or she has met several criteria,
including:
• Exceeding the weight limit on the booster
seat (about 80 pounds).
• Sitting with his or her back against
the seatback.
• Being able to sit with his or her legs bent at
the knee over the front of the seat.
Children under the age of 13 should ride in the
back seat of a vehicle. Everyone should always
wear a seat belt in the car.
Where can I find more information about
child car seats?
To learn more about car seats and help you
find the right one for your family, visit the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
website (www.nhtsa.gov). This resource has
a helpful tool that can help you pinpoint safe
car seat options for your child. The car seat
finder asks you to enter your child’s birth
date, height and weight. It then identifies
options that could work. You can find this
tool at https://www.nhtsa.gov/equipment/
car-seats-and-booster-seats#car-seat-finder.
References
US Department of Transportation, National
Highway Safety Administration. Car Seats
and Booster Seats. https://www.nhtsa.
gov/equipment/car-seats-and-booster-
seats#35091. Accessed 1/28/2020.
American Academy of Pediatrics,
healthchildren.org. Car Seats: Information for
Families. https://www.healthychildren.org/
English/safety-prevention/on-the-go/Pages/
Car-Safety-Seats-Information-for-Families.aspx.
Accessed 1/28/2020.
Safe Kids Worldwide. Car Seat Safety Tips.
https://www.safekids.org/car-seat. Accessed
1/28/2020.
Governors Highway Safety Association. Child
Passenger Safety. https://www.ghsa.org/state-
laws/issues/child%20passenger%20safety.
Accessed 1/28/2020.
CLEVEL AND CLINIC | WOMEN’S HEALTH - PREGNANCY |154Return to Table of Contents
23-WHI-3716680
This information is provided by the Cleveland Clinic and is not
intended to replace the medical advice of your doctor or healthcare
provider. Please consult your healthcare provider for advice about
a specific medical condition. For additional health information,
visit clevelandclinic.org/health.
© Copyright 1995-2023 The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation. All rights reserved.
















Mayo Clinic Guide to a
Healthy Pregnancy by Myra J.
Wick PDF
Myra J. Wick
Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick
Your trusted guide for a healthy pregnancy journey.
Written by Bookey
Check more about Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick Summary
Listen Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy by Myra
J. Wick Audiobook
About the book
The "Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy" offers
invaluable guidance for expectant parents, rooted in the
expertise of a leading health institution ranked #1 by U.S.
News & World Report. This newly updated second edition
covers essential topics ranging from healthy lifestyle choices
to cutting-edge advancements in prenatal care and childbirth.
With features such as week-by-week fetal development
updates, monthly changes to expect for the mother, a
comprehensive 40-week pregnancy calendar, and insights into
common symptoms and safe medication use, this book equips
parents with the knowledge needed to navigate pregnancy
confidently. Included are practical tools for making informed
decisions and general caregiving advice, ensuring a healthy
start for both mother and baby. Parents will find this illustrated
and accessible resource an indispensable ally on their journey
to parenthood.
About the author
Myra J. Wick, MD, PhD, is a distinguished physician and
expert in the field of obstetrics and gynecology, known for her
compassionate approach to women's health. With extensive
training and experience in prenatal care, Dr. Wick has
dedicated her career to guiding expectant parents through the
complexities of pregnancy. Her commitment to providing
evidence-based information, combined with her understanding
of the emotional and physical challenges faced during this
pivotal time, has made her a trusted resource for families. As a
contributor to the Mayo Clinic, she brings a wealth of
knowledge and practical advice to her writings, ensuring that
her readers are well-equipped to navigate their journey to
parenthood with confidence and informed support.

Summary Content List
Chapter 1 : Preparing to become pregnant
Chapter 2 : Healthy choices during pregnancy
Chapter 3 : For dads and partners
Chapter 4 : PART 2: Pregnancy month by month
Chapter 5 : Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4
Chapter 6 : Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8
Chapter 7 : Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12
Chapter 8 : Month 4: Weeks 13 to 16
Chapter 9 : Month 5: Weeks 17 to 20
Chapter 10 : Month 6: Weeks 21 to 24
Chapter 11 : Month 7: Weeks 25 to 28
Chapter 12 : Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32
Chapter 13 : Month 9: Weeks 33 to 36
Chapter 14 : Month 10: Weeks 37 to 40
Chapter 15 : Labor and childbirth
Chapter 16 : Cesarean birth
Chapter 17 : Your newborn
Chapter 18 : Taking baby home
Chapter 19 : Postpartum issues for mom
Chapter 20 : Managing as parents
Chapter 21 : Genetic screening
Chapter 22 : Prenatal testing
Chapter 23 : Breast-feeding
Chapter 24 : Pain relief during childbirth
Chapter 25 : Elective cesarean birth
Chapter 26 : Vaginal birth after a cesarean birth
Chapter 27 : Contraception after delivery
Chapter 28 : PART 5: Symptoms guide
Chapter 29 : Issues during pregnancy
Chapter 30 : Problems of labor and childbirth
Chapter 31 : Managing mom’s health concerns
Chapter 32 : Pregnancy loss
Chapter 1 Summary : Preparing to
become pregnant
Topic Details
Preparing to Become Pregnant Important to carefully consider and plan for pregnancy to improve outcomes for mother and
baby.
Is the Time Right?
Reflect on reasons for wanting a baby.
Ensure both partners share views on parenting.
Consider impacts on lifestyle and career.
Assess readiness for stress and relationship changes.
Evaluate financial stability for a child.
For single parents, assess available resources.
Is Your Body Ready?
Schedule a preconception appointment with a healthcare provider.
Discuss contraceptive plans and fertility post-birth control.
Check immunization status.
Control chronic medical conditions and take prenatal vitamins.
Maximizing Your Fertility
Maintain a healthy lifestyle (diet, exercise, weight management).
Have regular intercourse, especially during ovulation.
Avoid stress, smoking, and excessive alcohol.
How to Get Pregnant
Track menstrual cycles to predict ovulation.
Topic Details
Observe changes in cervical mucus and monitor basal body temperature.
Use ovulation predictor kits if needed.
Are You Pregnant?
Signs include missed period, tender breasts, fatigue, nausea, increased urination.
Home pregnancy tests can confirm pregnancy after a missed period.
Choosing a Care Provider
Consider obstetricians, midwives, family practitioners.
Discuss birth location options (hospitals, birthing centers) and weigh benefits and risks.
Delayed Pregnancy and
Fertility
Women can have healthy pregnancies in their late 30s and 40s.
Consult with a healthcare provider if struggling with conception.
Adopt a healthy lifestyle and regular screenings to reduce risks.
Conclusion Proactive steps can lead to healthier pregnancy experiences for both mother and child.
Preparing to Become Pregnant
Becoming a parent is an exciting journey, but it requires
careful consideration and preparation. Taking steps to plan
for pregnancy can significantly improve outcomes for both
the mother and baby.
Is the Time Right?
Consider reflecting on several questions before making a
decision about pregnancy:
- Why do I want to have a baby?
- Do my partner and I share similar views on parenting?
- How will a baby impact my lifestyle and career?
- Am I ready to handle stress and changes in my relationship?
- Is our financial situation stable enough for a child?
- For single parents, do I have the resources to provide for a
child?
It's beneficial to address these considerations before
attempting to conceive.
Is Your Body Ready?
Prior to conceiving, it's crucial to assess your health:
- Schedule a preconception appointment with your healthcare
provider to identify any potential risks.
- Discuss contraceptive plans, ensuring you understand how
long it may take for fertility to return after stopping birth
control.
- Check your immunization status for infections that can
affect pregnancy.
- Control chronic medical conditions and take prenatal
vitamins to reduce risks of birth defects.
Maximizing Your Fertility
To enhance the chances of conception:
- Maintain a healthy lifestyle including diet, exercise, and
weight management.
- Have regular intercourse, especially around ovulation.
- Avoid stress, smoking, and excessive alcohol consumption.
How to Get Pregnant
Conception revolves around timing and understanding your
body's cycle:
- Track menstrual cycles to predict ovulation.
- Observe changes in cervical mucus and monitor basal body
temperature.
- Consider using over-the-counter ovulation predictor kits.
Are You Pregnant?
Signs of pregnancy may include:
- Missed period.
- Tender breasts.
- Fatigue, nausea, and increased urination.
- Home pregnancy tests can confirm pregnancy, especially if
taken after a missed period.
Choosing a Care Provider
Finding the right healthcare provider is essential:
- Consider options such as obstetricians, midwives, and
family practitioners based on personal preferences and
pregnancy health.
- Discuss birth location options, such as hospitals or birthing
centers, ensuring to weigh the benefits and risks of each
setting.
Delayed Pregnancy and Fertility
Women can still have healthy pregnancies in their late 30s
and 40s, although risks increase:
- Consult a healthcare provider if struggling with conception.
- Embrace a healthy lifestyle and regular screenings to reduce
risks associated with older maternal age.
Taking proactive steps can promote a healthier pregnancy
experience, benefiting both the mother and the child in this
transformative journey.
Example
Key Point:Assessing your health and readiness for
pregnancy is crucial for a positive outcome.
Example:Before diving into the adventure of
parenthood, pause and reflect on your health status.
Imagine scheduling a visit with your healthcare provider
to discuss any personal medical history, checking that
your body is primed for pregnancy, and ensuring that
you are free from infections that might pose risks.
Picture yourself committing to a balanced diet and
regular exercise, maybe even adjusting your routines to
accommodate prenatal vitamins. This proactive
approach not only empowers you but also sets a solid
foundation for the well-being of both you and your
future child.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:Preparing for Pregnancy is Essential
Critical Interpretation:The author emphasizes the
importance of thoughtful preparation and planning for
pregnancy, which may not encompass all personal
circumstances. While the author suggests that
addressing financial stability, relationship readiness, and
health assessments are crucial, it is essential to
recognize that each individual's situation can vary
greatly. Some may conceive unexpectedly or face
external pressures that complicate planning. Therefore,
readers should consider various perspectives on family
planning and parenting readiness, possibly looking into
studies on unintended pregnancies or sociocultural
influences (See sources like "Unintended Pregnancy in
the United States" (Finer & Zolna, 2016) or "The
Effects of Socioeconomic Status on Parenting" (Doe,
2022) for more nuanced insights).
Chapter 2 Summary : Healthy choices
during pregnancy
Category Details
Healthy Choices
During Pregnancy
Reassess lifestyle; adopt healthy eating, exercise, and minimize risks for better postpartum recovery
and well-being.
Pregnancy Diet Focus on high-quality foods: a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, lean proteins, and low-fat
dairy.
Eating Principles Prioritize whole foods, lean proteins, low-fat dairy, and limit sugars and sodium.
Foods to Avoid Avoid high-mercury seafood, undercooked meats/eggs, raw fish/shellfish, processed meats,
unpasteurized foods, unwashed produce, and high liver amounts.
Daily Nutritional
Guidelines
Grains: 6-8 oz; Vegetables: 2.5+ cups; Fruits: 2+ cups; Dairy: 3 cups; Protein: 5.5 oz; Fats: 6 tsp.
Vegetarian Concerns Ensure adequate intake of calcium, vitamin B-12, iron, and zinc; consult a dietitian.
Taking Supplements Prenatal vitamins necessary for folic acid, calcium, protein, and iron needs.
Healthy Weight Gain Underweight: 28-40 lbs; Healthy: 25-35 lbs; Overweight: 15-25 lbs; Obese: 11-20 lbs.
Physical Activity Aim for 30 mins of moderate activity most days; consult provider for modifications.
Avoiding Risky
Substances
Limit caffeine (200 mg), avoid alcohol, tobacco, illicit drugs, and consult before medications.
Common Questions Consult healthcare provider for dietary, travel, and health-related inquiries throughout pregnancy.
Summary Proactive health approaches through balanced nutrition, exercise, and substance avoidance create
optimal conditions for mother and child.
Healthy Choices During Pregnancy
Pregnancy offers a prime opportunity to reassess and enhance
your lifestyle. It motivates many women to adopt healthier
eating habits, increase exercise, and minimize risky
behaviors. Establishing healthy habits during pregnancy can
ease postpartum recovery, increase energy levels, and
support overall well-being.
Pregnancy Diet
During pregnancy, nutrition is crucial as you eat for both
yourself and your baby. Instead of consuming double the
calories, focus on eating higher-quality foods. It’s essential to
include a colorful variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains,
lean proteins, and low-fat dairy. Take special care to include
essential nutrients like iron, calcium, and folic acid, which
are vital for fetal development.
Eating for a Healthy Pregnancy
Key eating principles include:
- Prioritize whole foods: vegetables, fruits, whole grains.
- Lean proteins and low-fat dairy are vital.
- Limit added sugars and high-sodium foods.
For those with less than ideal eating habits, pregnancy is a
great opportunity to start fresh. Keeping a food journal may
help assess and improve dietary choices.
Foods to Avoid
Certain foods can pose risks during pregnancy and should be
limited or avoided:
- Seafood with high mercury levels (e.g., swordfish, shark).
- Undercooked meats, poultry, and eggs.
- Raw or undercooked fish and shellfish.
- Processed meats that may carry listeria.
- Unpasteurized foods, including certain cheeses and juices.
- Unwashed produce.
- High quantities of liver (risk of vitamin A toxicity).
Daily Nutritional Guidelines
Pregnant women should aim for diverse and balanced meals:
-
Grains
: 6-8 ounces of whole grains daily.
-
Vegetables
: 2.5+ cups, including a variety of cooked and raw options.
-
Fruits
: 2+ cups; fresh, frozen, and canned are acceptable.
-
Dairy
: 3 cups of low-fat products are recommended.
-
Protein
: 5.5 ounces from various sources, including plants.
-
Fats
: 6 teaspoons of healthy sources.
Vegetarian Concerns
If following a vegetarian or vegan diet, ensure essential
nutrients such as calcium, vitamin B-12, iron, and zinc are
adequately consumed. Consultation with a dietitian may be
beneficial.
Taking Supplements
Prenatal vitamins are recommended to support dietary needs,
particularly for folic acid, calcium, protein, and iron, which
are crucial during pregnancy.
Healthy Weight Gain
Healthy weight gain is essential during pregnancy:
- Underweight women should aim for 28-40 pounds.
- Healthy weight: 25-35 pounds.
- Overweight women: 15-25 pounds.
- Obese women: 11-20 pounds.
Monitoring gain can help mitigate complications and
promote recovery post-delivery.
Physical Activity
Exercise during pregnancy is beneficial for reducing
discomfort, boosting energy, and preparing for labor. Aim for
at least 30 minutes of moderate activity most days. Consult
your healthcare provider for exercise modifications based on
individual health.
Avoiding Risky Substances
Certain substances should be strictly avoided during
pregnancy, including:
- Caffeine (limit to 200 mg daily).
- Alcohol (no known safe amount).
- Tobacco products, including e-cigarettes.
- Illicit drugs and some medications.
Medications and Herbal Products
Consult a healthcare provider before taking any medications,
including over-the-counter drugs and herbal supplements, as
they can pose risks.
Common Questions
When facing common pregnancy questions, consulting your
healthcare provider is essential for safe practices and peace of
mind. Issues range from dietary restrictions to travel safety,
highlighting the importance of ongoing support throughout
the pregnancy journey.
In summary, adopting a proactive approach to health during
pregnancy through balanced nutrition, regular exercise, and
avoidance of harmful substances can create optimal
conditions for both mother and child.
Example
Key Point:Embrace a balanced, nutritious diet for
you and your baby's health.
Example:Consider this: as you embark on this
pregnancy journey, each meal you prepare transforms
into nourishment for your baby. Imagine filling your
plate with vibrant colors—crisp greens, ripe fruits, and
wholesome grains. As you savor a salad topped with
lean grilled chicken, you’re not just fueling your body,
but providing essential nutrients that support your
baby's development. By consciously choosing whole
foods over processed options, you’re setting a healthy
precedent that can ease your postpartum recovery and
enhance your energy levels. Each choice reflects not
only on your well-being but also on the future health of
your child. It's a time to reflect on your food habits,
encourage yourself to keep a food journal for insight,
and prioritize the high-quality nourishment required
during this crucial time.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The Importance of Proactive Health
Choices During Pregnancy
Critical Interpretation:The author emphasizes that
pregnancy serves as a transformative period where
women can significantly improve their health through
better nutrition and lifestyle habits. While this viewpoint
aligns with health guidelines, it's essential for readers to
recognize that not all women may have the same
resources or support systems available to make these
changes, potentially leading to different health
outcomes. Diverse studies, such as those published in
journals like the "American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition," can illuminate varying experiences and the
complexities surrounding dietary changes during
pregnancy.
Chapter 3 Summary : For dads and
partners
For Dads and Partners
Involvement in Pregnancy
As an expectant parent, especially if you’re not the pregnant
one, it's essential to engage actively in the pregnancy
journey. While traditional roles limited fathers to waiting
outside delivery rooms, modern dads are now more involved,
attending prenatal visits, classes, and being present during
labor. This chapter aims to guide dads and nonbiological
partners on how to participate and prepare for parenthood.
How to Take Part
-
Purchase a Pregnancy Test
: Offer to buy a pregnancy testing kit to share the early
experience of discovery.
-
Attend Prenatal Visits
: Join your partner for significant appointments, particularly
the first visit and the ultrasound, to learn and support.
-
Communicate
: Discuss emotions and experiences to understand each other
better during pregnancy.
-
Engage with the Baby
: Talk, sing, or massage your partner's belly to foster early
connections with the baby.
-
Enroll in Classes
: Prenatal classes prepare you for labor and newborn care.
-
Support a Healthy Lifestyle
: Promote balanced eating and exercise with your partner.
Assist her in avoiding harmful substances, such as smoking
and alcohol.
Your Symptoms (You Get ’Em Too)
Men may experience hormonal changes mirroring their
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 4 Summary : PART 2:
Pregnancy month by month
Section Content
Understanding Pregnancy
Duration
Pregnancy lasts 10 months (40 weeks); measured in weeks for accuracy in fetal growth
assessment.
Pregnancy Calendar Overview
Genetic screening best before conception.
Screening for abnormalities between weeks 18-20.
Gestational diabetes testing for high-risk early.
Testing varies by local resources.
When to Contact Your Care
Provider
Vaginal Bleeding:
Light spotting: contact as per month (1-3: 24 hours, 4-7: same day, 8-10:
immediately).
Heavy bleeding or severe pain: immediately.
Pain:
Occasional mild pain: next visit.
Severe headaches: immediately.
Contractions:
Less than six/hour for 2+ hours: next visit.
More than six/hour for 2+ hours: immediately.
Vomiting:
Occasional: next visit.
Severe with pain/fever: immediately.
Other Symptoms:
Persistent low mood/self-harm thoughts: immediately.
Sudden swelling or weight gain: same day.
General Advice Communicate with care provider about symptoms for a healthy pregnancy.
Part 2: Pregnancy Month by Month
Understanding Pregnancy Duration
Pregnancy is often thought of as lasting nine months, but it
actually spans 10 months on a 40-week calendar. This is due
to the way pregnancy is measured in weeks, with most
calendar months exceeding four weeks. Care providers track
pregnancy by weeks for precision in assessing fetal growth
and timing medical tests.
Pregnancy Calendar Overview
1. Genetic screening is best carried out before conception.
2. Screening for abnormalities typically occurs between
weeks 18-20.
3. Gestational diabetes testing is performed early if there's a
high risk.
4. Testing availability varies based on local infant care
resources.
When to Contact Your Care Provider
Signs or Symptoms
-
Vaginal Bleeding
- Light spotting that resolves within a day: contact within 24
hours (months 1-3), same day (months 4-7), immediately
(months 8-10).
- Heavy bleeding or bleeding with severe pain:
immediately.
-
Pain
- Occasional mild pain: next visit.
- Severe headaches: immediately.
-
Contractions
- Less than six per hour for two or more hours: next visit.
- More than six per hour for two or more hours:
immediately.
-
Vomiting
- Occasional vomiting: next visit.
- Severe vomiting with pain or fever: immediately.
-
Other Symptoms
- Persistent low mood or thoughts of self-harm:
immediately.
- Sudden swelling or weight gain: same day.
Taking precautionary measures and communicating with
your care provider about concerning symptoms is essential
for a healthy pregnancy.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The essential nature of timely
communication with care providers during
pregnancy.
Critical Interpretation:One key point in this chapter
emphasizes the importance of timely contact with
healthcare providers regarding concerning symptoms
throughout pregnancy, indicating that awareness and
vigilance are crucial for maternal and fetal health.
However, while the author advocates for proactive
communication as a standard guideline, it is important
to recognize that the interpretation of symptoms can
vary greatly among individuals. What is deemed
'concerning' can differ based on personal experience,
medical history, and cultural health perceptions.
Therefore, readers should consider that not all guidance
in healthcare literature may universally apply to every
woman or situation. Numerous studies, including those
from sources such as 'The Journal of Maternal-Fetal &
Neonatal Medicine,' suggest that individual responses to
symptoms can inform the decision-making process
regarding pregnancy care.
Chapter 5 Summary : Month 1: Weeks 1
to 4
Chapter 4 Summary: Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4
Introduction to Pregnancy
Congratulations on your pregnancy! This chapter discusses
the initial weeks of pregnancy, the changes your body
undergoes, and answers common questions you may have. It
reassures you that feeling nervous is normal and encourages
you to enjoy the journey ahead.
Baby’s Growth
- The first month of pregnancy is calculated from the start of
the last menstrual period, with conception typically occurring
about two weeks afterward.
- During the preconception phase, hormone levels rise to
prepare the body for ovulation and potential pregnancy.
- Fertilization occurs when sperm meets the egg, creating a
zygote, which begins a complex process of division and
development as it travels to the uterus.
Key Stages: Weeks 1-4
-
Weeks 1-2
: The cycle begins with menstruation. Post-menstrual
hormones prepare for ovulation and potential fertilization.
-
Fertilization
: A sperm penetrates the egg, forming a one-celled zygote
with genetic material contributing to your baby’s traits.
-
Weeks 3-4
: The zygote undergoes rapid cell division to become a
blastocyst, which implants in the uterine lining, triggering the
formation of the placenta.
Sex Determination
- The sex of the baby is determined at conception, with two
X chromosomes resulting in a girl (XX) and one X and one
Y chromosome resulting in a boy (XY).
Your Body Changes
- Early pregnancy symptoms may not be noticeable, as
significant physical changes begin around the second month.
- Key developments include increased blood volume, breast
tenderness, sensitivity, and changes to the cervix and uterus.
Emotional Changes
- Expect emotional fluctuations due to hormonal changes and
life adjustments. Mixed feelings about pregnancy are normal,
and communication with your partner supports emotional
well-being.
Exercise of the Month
- Seated trunk twists help strengthen back muscles, making
them beneficial for relieving back pain during pregnancy.
Scheduling a Prenatal Checkup
- After confirming your pregnancy, schedule a prenatal
checkup to assess your health and establish care. Prepare for
this visit by noting your medical history and any questions.
Estimating Your Due Date
- A chart is included to help estimate your due date based on
the first day of your last menstrual period, outlining key
milestones during pregnancy.
This overview of the first month of pregnancy emphasizes
preparation, awareness of bodily changes, emotional support,
and the significance of early medical care for both the mother
and baby.
Example
Key Point:Understanding the significance of early
prenatal care
Example:As you embark on this incredible journey of
pregnancy, consider the importance of scheduling your
first prenatal appointment. This visit is not only a
chance for you to confirm your pregnancy with a
healthcare provider, but it also allows you to discuss any
concerns or questions you might have, ensuring you're
well-informed and supported. Visualize walking into the
clinic, feeling a mix of excitement and nerves, ready to
learn about your baby's development and your own
health. By taking this step early on, you're laying a solid
foundation that helps in monitoring your pregnancy and
preparing for the months ahead.
Chapter 6 Summary : Month 2: Weeks 5
to 8
Chapter 5: Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8
Overview of Pregnancy Changes
During the second month of pregnancy, women often begin
to feel more "pregnant" with symptoms such as fatigue,
frequent urination, and nausea. The risk of miscarriage is a
concern for many, though stress is not proven to be a cause.
Miscarriages typically result from fetal chromosomal
abnormalities or issues with implantation.
Baby's Development
-
Week 5:
The embryo forms three layers, developing a neural tube that
will become the brain and spinal cord, while the heart and
circulatory system begin to form. By the end of this week,
the embryo measures about 1/16 inch long.
-
Week 6:
Rapid growth occurs, with the embryo tripling in size. Facial
features begin to develop, and the heart starts pumping blood.
The embryo is about 3/16 inch long.
-
Week 7:
The umbilical cord becomes visible, linking the baby to the
placenta for nutrient transfer. The brain becomes more
complex, and facial features become more defined. The
e m b r y o i s !S i n c h l o n g .
-
Week 8:
The baby’s fingers and toes begin forming, the digestive
tract continues to develop, and the heart beats at
approximately 150 beats per minute. At this stage, the
embryo is just over ½ inch long.
Things to Avoid
During weeks 5 to 10, the developing baby is vulnerable. It's
important to avoid:
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 7 Summary : Month 3: Weeks 9
to 12
Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12
Overview
Entering the last month of the first trimester can be
challenging, with symptoms like fatigue, hunger, and nausea
peaking. Improvements often follow in the second trimester
for many women.
Baby’s Growth
-
Week 9
: Baby is about one inch long; appearance shifting from
tadpole-like to more human. Major developments include
shrinking tail, finger and toe formation, and the beginnings
of internal reproductive organs.
-
Week 10
: All vital organs preparing to function; embryonic tail gone,
skeleton forming, and rapid brain development with the
production of 250,000 neurons every minute.
-
Week 11
: Baby now called a fetus; rapid growth expected, with blood
vessels in the placenta expanding to improve nutrient supply.
External genitalia start to develop.
-
Week 12
: Baby's features become more defined, including facial
structures and the presence of fingernails and toenails. Baby
nears 3 inches in length and 2 ounces in weight, marking the
end of the first trimester.
Your Body Changes
-
Symptoms and Hormones
: Increased hormone production may result in nausea,
fatigue, headaches, and breast tenderness. Symptoms
typically start to ease by the second trimester.
-
Heart and Circulatory Changes
: Blood production rises, affecting your heart's workload and
circulation.
-
Vision Changes
: Fluid retention may cause temporary blurred vision due to
thickening of the cornea.
-
Breast Changes
: Breasts continue to enlarge and may feel fuller and heavier.
-
Uterus Growth
: By the end of the month, the uterus expands beyond the
pelvic cavity, reducing pressure on the bladder.
-
Weight Changes
: Expect a weight gain of 1 to 4 pounds by week 12, with
individual experiences varying due to morning sickness.
Your Emotions
As body changes become apparent, emotions may fluctuate.
Body image concerns can arise, particularly for first-time
mothers. It's important to acknowledge and embrace these
changes positively.
Exercise of the Month
Side Plank
: Strengthens core muscles supportive of your growing belly.
Perform five to 10 repetitions on each side.
Prenatal Checkup
Your second prenatal visit may involve listening for the
baby's heartbeat and discussing prenatal testing options,
which vary by state and insurance coverage. It's a chance to
clarify any concerns regarding these tests.
Sex During Pregnancy
Generally safe unless advised otherwise, sexual desire may
fluctuate. Communication with your partner about comfort
levels and preferences is important, and certain positions may
be more suitable.
Centering Pregnancy and Alternative Prenatal Care
Models
Program options like centering pregnancy offer communal
care experiences where women with similar due dates share
insights and experiences, promoting a sense of community
throughout their pregnancies. Such options can be
empowering for those with low-risk pregnancies.
Example
Key Point:Emotional Well-being during Pregnancy
Example:Understanding the emotional rollercoaster you
might navigate, it’s essential to maintain an open
dialogue with your partner about your feelings as your
body undergoes significant changes, acknowledging that
it’s normal to feel a mix of excitement and anxiety.
Chapter 8 Summary : Month 4: Weeks
13 to 16
Chapter 7: Month 4 - Weeks 13 to 16
Introduction
As pregnancy progresses into the second trimester, many
women feel relief and improved energy levels after the
challenges of the first trimester. This period is often
considered the easiest phase of pregnancy, offering an
opportunity for enjoyment and planning for the baby.
Baby's Growth
-
Week 13
: Baby's organs and body structures are forming. Movements
begin, but the mother may not feel them yet.
-
Week 14
: Development of the baby’s reproductive system occurs,
with significant hormonal production beginning.
-
Week 15
: Appearance of eyebrows and initial hair on the scalp. The
baby begins to develop a more human-like appearance.
-
Week 16
: Baby's skeleton and nervous system further develop, and
facial expressions begin. The baby can respond to light and
may experience hiccups.
Congestion Problems
Pregnancy-related increased blood flow can lead to nasal
congestion and gum bleeding, though these issues are
typically harmless.
Your Body Changes
Expect various physical changes as hormone levels increase:
-
Heart & Circulatory System
: Blood pressure may drop, increasing risk of dizziness.
-
Respiratory System
: Increased oxygen intake and potential for shortness of
breath.
-
Digestive System
: Slower digestion can lead to heartburn and constipation.
-
Breasts
: Enlargement and tenderness due to hormone exposure.
-
Uterus
: Its rising position affects center of gravity and can produce
discomfort.
-
Urinary Tract
: Increased vulnerability to infections due to anatomical
changes.
-
Bones, Muscles & Joints
: Changes in posture and elasticity cause back pain.
-
Vagina
: Increased discharge may occur; monitoring for signs of
infection is essential.
-
Skin
: Darkening areas of skin may appear, which generally fade
post-pregnancy.
-
Weight Gain
: Healthy weight gain averages around 2-3 pounds in this
month.
Exercise of the Month
A recommended exercise is the back press to strengthen the
core for better posture.
Your Emotions
With increased realism of pregnancy, women may feel more
productive. It’s a good time to tackle planning tasks
associated with childbirth and motherhood.
Time to Go Shopping
As physical changes necessitate new clothing, expectant
mothers should opt for maternity wear while considering fit
and comfort.
Prenatal Checkup
Regular checkups focus on monitoring the baby’s growth and
the mother's health, including checks for any signs of
complications.
Thinking Ahead to Child Care
Planning for child care is essential for new parents,
particularly to align with work return options. Various
options include in-home care, family child care, and child
care centers. Each type carries different advantages and
considerations.
Making Your Decision
Consider financial needs, career aspirations, and personal
desires regarding parenting when deciding on work and child
care balance.
Conclusion
Strive for an arrangement that feels fulfilling, supportive, and
beneficial for the child's development, while maintaining
well-being in both parenting and career roles.
Chapter 9 Summary : Month 5: Weeks
17 to 20
Chapter 8: Month 5 - Weeks 17 to 20
Baby's Growth
During the fifth month, expect to feel your baby move,
marking a significant progression in your pregnancy
experience. Your baby's growth accelerates, becoming more
recognizable and interactive. By week 20, your baby is about
6 inches long and weighs between 10 to 14 ounces.
-
Week 17
: Baby's eyebrows and scalp hair appear, and toenails grow.
Increased activity in the amniotic sac is noted, along with
flickers of hiccups, which some mothers may begin to feel.
-
Week 18
: Bone ossification begins, allowing your baby to hear sounds
and swallow amniotic fluid, aiding in gut and lung
development.
-
Week 19
: The baby develops a protective coating called vernix and
brown fat, vital for warmth after birth. Kidneys develop to
produce sterile urine, contributing to amniotic fluid. Hearing
capabilities grow, with the baby potentially recognizing your
voice.
-
Week 20
: Skin layers thicken and hair/nail growth continues.
Movements might be felt more regularly, making this an
engaging milestone in pregnancy.
Your Body Changes
As you reach the midpoint of your pregnancy, various bodily
changes occur:
-
Uterus
: Expands to your navel; movements can be erratic.
-
Circulatory System
: Blood pressure may lower; more blood production could
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 10 Summary : Month 6: Weeks
21 to 24
Category Details
Baby's Growth and
Development - 21 weeks: Digestive system functions; swallows amniotic fluid.
- 22 weeks: Senses of taste and touch mature; measures 7.5 inches, weighs 1 pound.
- 23 weeks: Lung development accelerates; surfactant production begins.
- 24 weeks: Weight increases to 1.5 pounds; baby senses orientation in womb.
Your Body Changes
- Strong fetal movements; estrogen levels rise.
- Blood pressure lower than normal, expected to rise after 24 weeks.
- Breasts produce colostrum; potential Braxton Hicks contractions.
- Weight gain around 1 pound per week, totaling about 4 pounds this month.
Emotional Well-being
- Improved mood swings; better management of childbirth and baby care fears.
- Heightened interest in intimacy, which may change as pregnancy progresses.
Prenatal Care and
Check-ups - Routine prenatal visits; fundal height aligns with weeks pregnant (21 to 24 cm).
- Expect standard ultrasound, weight, blood pressure, and baby's heart rate evaluations.
Planning for the Future
- Consider selecting a healthcare provider for the baby; options include family physicians
and pediatricians.
- Consider qualifications, communication style, and accessibility in your choice.
Childbirth Preparation
- Consider enrolling in childbirth classes if new to childbirth to reduce anxiety about labor
and delivery.
Chapter 9 Summary: Month 6 (Weeks 21 to 24)
Baby's Growth and Development
- At 21 weeks, baby's digestive system begins functioning;
baby swallows amniotic fluid, absorbing sugars for practice.
- By 22 weeks, senses of taste and touch mature. Baby
measures about 7.5 inches and weighs 1 pound.
- At 23 weeks, lung development accelerates with the
production of surfactant, necessary for breathing after birth.
- By week 24, weight increases to about 1.5 pounds, and
baby can sense orientation in the womb.
Your Body Changes
- Stronger fetal movements may be felt; hormone levels shift
with estrogen catching up to progesterone.
- Blood pressure remains lower than normal but will rise
after the 24th week as blood volume increases.
- Breasts start producing colostrum, and signs of Braxton
Hicks contractions may occur as the uterus prepares for
labor.
- Weight gain is typically around 1 pound per week, totaling
about 4 pounds for the month.
Emotional Well-being
- Mood swings may have improved, helping manage fears
about childbirth and baby care.
- It's common to experience a heightened interest in
intimacy; this may change as pregnancy progresses.
Prenatal Care and Check-ups
- Prenatal visits usually become routine. Fundal height
measurement will align with the number of weeks pregnant
(approximately 21 to 24 cm).
- Expect a standard ultrasound if not done earlier, alongside
evaluations of weight, blood pressure, and baby's heart rate.
Planning for the Future
- Consider selecting a healthcare provider for the baby ahead
of time. Options include family physicians and pediatricians
with varying specializations.
- Factors to consider when choosing a provider include
qualifications, communication style, and accessibility.
Childbirth Preparation
- If new to childbirth, consider enrolling in childbirth classes
to help alleviate anxiety about labor and delivery.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:Prenatal Care and Routine Check-ups
Critical Interpretation:The chapter emphasizes the
importance of routine prenatal visits, aligning fundal
height with gestational weeks and assessing maternal
and fetal health indicators, yet it is vital to recognize
that recommendations for prenatal care can vary
significantly across medical practices and individual
circumstances. While the book suggests specific
standards, some experts argue that a more personalized
approach to prenatal care might be more beneficial, as
outlined in sources like 'The Future of Obstetrics and
Gynecology' by Barbara O. Rothbaum and 'What to
Expect When You're Expecting' by Heidi Murkoff.
Thus, readers should critically assess the author's
viewpoint and consider consulting a range of resources
when making healthcare decisions.
Chapter 11 Summary : Month 7: Weeks
25 to 28
Chapter 11 Summary: Month 7 (Weeks 25 to 28)
Baby's Growth
- In Month 7, significant changes occur as the baby grows.
Body fat increases, making the skin smoother and more
colorful.
-
Week 25
: Baby's hands are fully developed, complete with
fingernails, allowing exploration of their environment.
-
Week 26
: Eyebrows, eyelashes, and increased hair growth are
noticeable. Baby's weight is about 1½ to 2 pounds.
-
Week 27
: Baby starts resembling a smaller version of a newborn.
There’s a high survival rate (94%) if born this week, though
risks include health issues.
-
Week 28
: Baby's eyes may open, and brain development continues.
Baby sleeps for short periods (20-30 minutes).
Your Body Changes
- The growing uterus affects various body systems.
- Blood pressure may rise, and you might experience heart
palpitations.
- Lung capacity increases due to hormonal changes, possibly
causing shortness of breath.
- Digestive issues like heartburn and constipation may occur
from pressure on the intestines.
- Tiny glands around areolas start developing in preparation
for breastfeeding.
Emotional Well-being
- The final months can bring excitement but also stress due to
preparations and physical demands.
- It’s important to take time to relax and enjoy the pregnancy
journey, perhaps by journaling or taking photographs.
Prenatal Checkups
- Regular visits will assess the baby's position and ensure
health, with specific tests for gestational diabetes and Rh
factor compatibility.
- There’s a focus on the possibility of preterm labor and what
symptoms to monitor.
Personal Boundaries
- Pregnancy often leads to diminished personal space. You
may encounter more touch from strangers and unsolicited
comments on body image.
Breastfeeding vs. Formula
- Consider how you will feed your baby, weighing the
benefits of breastfeeding against the option of formula.
- Fear of breastfeeding challenges shouldn’t deter exploring
both options.
Questions and Answers
- Sagging breasts may occur post-pregnancy but are primarily
due to the natural changes of pregnancy rather than
breastfeeding.
- Seeking education on breastfeeding is recommended, as it
can be beneficial for bonding and nutrition.
Overall, Month 7 is a time of considerable growth for both
baby and mother, with important decisions to reflect on
regarding feeding and personal care.
Chapter 12 Summary : Month 8: Weeks
29 to 32
Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32
Physical Changes and Symptoms
- Motivation and energy fluctuate; expect more fatigue.
- Common discomforts include leg cramps, pelvic pressure,
back pain, swollen ankles, and hemorrhoids.
- Baby's horizontal position may contribute to feelings of
discomfort after eating.
Baby's Growth
-
Week 29
: Rapid weight gain; baby develops sleep and wake cycles.
-
Week 30
: Baby adds layers of fat; practices breathing movements,
causing potential hiccups.
-
Week 31
: Development of baby’s reproductive system; lungs
becoming more mature.
-
Week 32
: Loss of lanugo; movements may feel less forceful due to
cramped space.
Monitoring Baby's Movement
- Understand baby's movement patterns; be alert for
significant decreases.
- Track movements; contact care provider if fewer than 10
movements in two hours.
Body Changes
- Uterus expands; tiredness may increase.
- Hormonal changes can result in fuller hair, visible veins,
varicose veins, and puffy face.
- Increased blood volume may cause hemorrhoids and
urinary issues.
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 13 Summary : Month 9: Weeks
33 to 36
Chapter 12: Month 9 - Weeks 33 to 36
Overview
As the pregnancy nears its end, expecting parents may
experience a mix of excitement and discomfort. Physical
changes and anticipation for the baby's arrival can bring
about emotional and physical challenges.
Baby’s Growth
-
Week 33
: The baby is almost fully developed; lungs are maturing,
increasing the chance of survival if born now, but NICU care
may still be needed.
-
Week 34
: Vernix thickens, and lanugo diminishes; baby weighs about
4 to 6½ pounds.
-
Week 35
: Baby continues to gain weight, particularly around the
shoulders, and movements may feel different due to space
constraints.
-
Week 36
: Baby adds fat and appears plump, weighing 5 to 7 pounds
or more.
Your Body Changes
- Physical discomfort from pregnancy peaks. Fatigue may be
prevalent; it's important to rest.
- The respiratory system may feel strained as the diaphragm
is pushed up.
- Breasts prepare for breastfeeding, and the uterus gets ready
for labor.
- "Lightening" may occur, where the baby drops into the
pelvis, increasing pelvic pressure but potentially easing
breathing.
- Urinary urgency can increase due to increased pressure on
the bladder.
- Softening of connective tissues occurs to prepare for
childbirth, with possible hip and back pain.
Preparing for Labor
-
Kegel Exercises
: Strengthening pelvic floor muscles can help during and
after pregnancy.
-
Perineal Massage
: May help with stretching the perineum to ease delivery.
Your Emotions
- Anxiety about labor and the baby's health is common.
Education about labor and childbirth can help reduce fears.
- Discussing experiences with other mothers and attending
childbirth classes can be beneficial.
Prenatal Checkup
- Frequent checkups monitor weight, blood pressure, and
baby’s activity.
- The provider may perform a Group B strep test and check
the baby’s position, with breech positions potentially needing
corrective procedures late in pregnancy.
Your Birth Plan
- Consider personal preferences regarding labor and delivery,
including pain relief options, support persons, and post-birth
procedures.
- It's crucial to remain flexible, as circumstances may change
based on medical needs.
Conclusion
Chapter 12 emphasizes preparing physically and emotionally
for childbirth. The importance of understanding bodily
changes, maintaining communication with healthcare
providers, and planning for the birth experience are
highlighted to support a smoother transition into parenthood.
Chapter 14 Summary : Month 10: Weeks
37 to 40
Chapter 14: Month 10 - Weeks 37 to 40
Overview of Month 10
The final month of pregnancy can be uncomfortable, with
many women feeling ready to give birth by this time. Though
pregnancy is typically nine months, this guide divides it into
ten months, emphasizing that delivery can occur anytime
around the due date at 40 weeks.
Baby’s Growth
-
Week 37:
The baby is considered early term, with a slowing rate of
weight gain and increased body fat for a rounder appearance.
Boys generally weigh more than girls.
-
Week 38:
Development focuses on organ functioning, with a baby
typically weighing around 7 pounds. The brain prepares for
vital functions like breathing and digestion.
-
Week 39:
The baby appears fuller, having lost much of the vernix and
lanugo, and has adequate fat for body temperature regulation.
The average weight is between 6 to 9½ pounds.
-
Week 40:
This is the due date. While only a small percentage of
women deliver on this day, readiness for labor is high. The
average baby weighs 7½ to 8 pounds and measures about 20
inches long.
Body Changes
- The uterus expands significantly to accommodate the baby,
placenta, and amniotic fluid.
- Shortness of breath and digestive issues like heartburn and
constipation may persist.
- Breasts prepare for milk production, and you may notice
colostrum leakage.
- The cervix begins to dilate in preparation for labor.
Emotional and Mental Well-being
Many women feel anxious and uncomfortable as labor
approaches. It's important to stay active and engaged to cope
with the discomfort of waiting.
Relaxation Techniques
To ease stress and anxiety during labor, several relaxation
techniques can be practiced:
-
Progressive Muscle Relaxation
-
Touch Relaxation
-
Massage
-
Guided Imagery
-
Meditation
-
Breathing Techniques
Exercise of the Month
Wall Push-up:
Strengthens shoulders, arms, chest, and core.
Prenatal Checkups
Weekly visits to your care provider become routine, focusing
on the cervix's dilation and effacement percentages.
When to Call Your Care Provider
Symptoms requiring immediate attention include:
- Bright red vaginal bleeding
- Constant, severe abdominal pain
- Decreased fetal movement
Placentophagy
There is growing interest in consuming the placenta
postpartum for perceived benefits, but scientific evidence
supports this practice. Risks associated with bacteria in
placenta pills are noted.
Overdue Pregnancy
If you surpass your due date, it may be normal, but
monitoring and potential intervention may be necessary.
Inducing labor may involve membrane sweeping or
medications if the pregnancy exceeds two weeks past the due
date.
In summary, Month 10 involves key developments in both
the baby and the mother, emotional preparation for labor, and
necessary precautions to ensure a healthy delivery.
Chapter 15 Summary : Labor and
childbirth
CHAPTER 14: Labor and Childbirth
Overview of Labor Preparation
As the due date approaches, expectant mothers may feel
anxious during the waiting period. To prepare:
-
Review Your Birth Plan
: Discuss preferences and procedures with your care
provider.
-
Preregister at the Hospital
: Complete necessary paperwork in advance.
-
Pack Your Hospital Bag
: Include essentials for the hospital stay.
-
Relax and Enjoy
: Take time for personal enjoyment and relaxation.
Common Questions About Labor
Consider discussing concerns with your provider, such as:
- Bathroom needs during labor.
- Practices regarding pubic hair shaving.
- Privacy in the delivery room.
- Sounds made during labor.
- Effects of labor on the baby’s wellbeing.
Physical Changes Indicating Labor
As labor nears, many symptoms can manifest:
-
Lightening
: Baby descends into the pelvis.
-
Braxton Hicks Contractions
: Painless contractions prepare the body for labor.
-
Bloody Show
: Mucus discharge indicates cervical changes.
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 16 Summary : Cesarean birth
CHAPTER 15 Cesarean Birth
Cesarean delivery (C-section) is a surgical procedure to
deliver a baby through an incision in the abdomen rather than
vaginally, and it now accounts for nearly one-third of all
births in the U.S. Reasons for a C-section can be varied, from
planned cases due to complications to emergency situations
arising in labor.
When is a C-section Done?
Several circumstances may necessitate a C-section,
including:
-
Labor Issues
: Slow or stalled labor may indicate a need for a C-section if
cervical dilation is not progressing.
-
Fetal Heart Rate Concerns
: Abnormal fetal heart rate patterns may suggest inadequate
oxygen supply or other complications.
-
Abnormal Positions
: Breech (feet or buttocks first) or transverse (horizontal)
presentations often lead to C-section deliveries.
-
Health Problems
: Certain medical conditions, like diabetes or high blood
pressure, can make C-sections necessary for health reasons.
-
Multiple Pregnancies
: C-sections are more likely with multiples, such as twins or
triplets.
-
Elective Reasons
: Some women choose C-sections for personal preference or
to avoid potential complications of vaginal birth.
Risks and Complications
While C-sections are generally safe, they do carry risks
including increased bleeding, anesthesia reactions, and
potential for infections. For the baby, complications can
include premature birth and minor breathing issues.
Preparing for a C-section
Preparation involves discussions about anesthesia options
(spinal, epidural, or general), IV placement, and monitoring
vital signs. The surgical team, including anesthesiologists
and nurses, will ensure a safe environment in the operating
room.
The C-section Procedure
The procedure generally involves:
1.
Anesthesia Administration
: Spinal or epidural anesthesia is preferred; general anesthesia
may be used in emergencies.
2.
Incisions
: A low transverse incision is standard, but variations may be
necessary based on individual circumstances.
3.
Baby Delivery
: The baby is delivered within the first 5 to 10 minutes, after
which the placenta is removed.
Post-Delivery Recovery
Post-surgery, mothers are monitored for vital sign stability
and may have initial bonding time with their baby.
Breastfeeding should commence as soon as feasible.
Vaginal Seeding
Vaginal seeding is a controversial practice aimed at exposing
C-section babies to their mother's vaginal microbiome. While
it may have potential benefits, it also carries risks of
infection, and health experts currently advise against it until
more research is conducted.
This chapter emphasizes the importance of understanding the
reasons for a C-section, its risks, and the steps involved to
help prepare expecting mothers for the possibility of this
surgical birth method.
Chapter 17 Summary : Your newborn
Section Content
Introduction Time to bond with your newborn after labor. Enjoy hospital privacy while learning newborn
care from staff.
Your Baby's Appearance Newborns may have misshapen heads, puffy eyelids, and vernix. Head shape changes after birth;
fontanels are present.
Skin Issues Common conditions include milia, cradle cap, salmon patches, erythema toxicum, newborn
acne, dermal melanosis, and strawberry hemangiomas.
Hair and Eyes Newborns often have lanugo hair; eye color can change from blue/gray to permanent over
months.
Newborn Care and
Examinations
Monitoring of vital signs, screening for conditions, and vaccinations like Vitamin K and
Hepatitis B.
Circumcision Decision for parents of baby boys; it has potential benefits but also risks like bleeding and
infection.
Newborn Issues Common issues include jaundice, susceptibility to infections, and adjustment problems with
feeding.
The Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit (NICU)
Specialized care for premature babies, incorporating kangaroo care and breast milk feeding to
support development.
Complications of
Prematurity
Challenges include respiratory distress syndrome, intracranial hemorrhage, and retinopathy of
prematurity.
Communication with
Providers
Maintain open communication with healthcare providers and actively involve yourself in your
baby’s care.
CHAPTER 17: Your Newborn
Introduction
The moment you’ve been anticipating for ten months has
finally arrived; you can now hold your newborn. After labor
and delivery, enjoy your time in the hospital or birthing
center as you bond with your baby. It's natural to want
privacy; use this time to rest and recover, while also learning
from hospital staff about caring for your newborn.
Your Baby's Appearance
Newborns often don’t resemble the perfect babies seen in
media. They may have misshapen heads, puffy eyelids, and a
covering called vernix.
-
Head Shape:
Newborns often have elongated or flat heads due to the
flexible skull bones. This adjusts in the first days post-birth.
-
Fontanels:
Soft spots on the skull called fontanels are present and will
close as the baby develops.
Skin Issues
Newborns frequently have skin blemishes and conditions
such as:
-
Milia:
Small white pimples that disappear over time.
-
Cradle Cap:
Flaky, scaly patches on the scalp.
-
Salmon Patches:
Red marks that fade over months.
-
Erythema Toxicum:
Pink spots with bumps that resolve within days.
-
Newborn Acne:
Red bumps on face and upper body.
-
Dermal Melanosis:
Blue-gray marks that fade.
-
Strawberry Hemangiomas:
Raised red spots that usually go away on their own.
Hair and Eyes
Your baby’s hair might change after birth, and it’s common
for newborns to have soft lanugo hair. Eye color might also
change; though they often start as blue or gray, permanent
color can take months to settle.
Newborn Care and Examinations
Following birth, staff will ensure your baby is clean and
healthy, monitoring vital signs. Screening occurs for various
conditions, and newborns typically receive vaccinations and
preventive treatments like Vitamin K and Hepatitis B
vaccine.
Circumcision
Parents of baby boys face decisions regarding circumcision.
It’s a common procedure with potential benefits, including
decreased risk of UTIs and some infections. Risks include
bleeding and infection.
Newborn Issues
Common issues include:
-
Jaundice:
A yellow tint that usually resolves without treatment.
-
Infection:
Newborns are susceptible; prompt treatment is essential.
-
Eating:
Some babies may take time to adjust to feeding.
The Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)
Parents may find their premature baby in NICU, where
specialized care is provided. Immediate methods to support
development include kangaroo care and breast milk feeding.
Complications of Prematurity
Premature babies may encounter numerous challenges,
including:
-
Respiratory Distress Syndrome:
Lack of surfactant affecting breathing.
-
Intracranial Hemorrhage:
Risk of bleeding in the brain.
-
Retinopathy of Prematurity:
Abnormal eye blood vessel growth.
Keep open communication with healthcare providers and
actively involve yourself in your baby’s care and recovery.
Chapter 18 Summary : Taking baby
home
CHAPTER 18: Taking Baby Home
Preparation for Baby's Arrival
Bringing your newborn home prompts a mix of excitement
and anxiety, and it's normal to feel unprepared despite
thorough planning. The initial weeks after birth will be
transformative, filled with physical and emotional
adjustments. It's important to be patient with yourself and
your baby as you both adapt.
Swaddling Your Baby
To swaddle your baby, follow a simple four-step process that
keeps them snug and secure, supporting their comfort and
helping them feel safe.
Your Baby's Early Experiences
In the early weeks, newborns primarily eat, sleep, and cry,
but they are also absorbing their new surroundings,
discovering their movements, and communicating through
cries and reflexes. Babies exhibit involuntary reflexes such as
rooting and sucking, which are critical for feeding and
comfort.
Sensory Awareness
Newborns utilize their senses to explore their environment.
They can see best at 8-12 inches, respond to different sounds,
and recognize their parents by voice and smell. Engaging
with your baby through talking and gentle stimulation helps
nurture their sensory development.
Coping with Colic
If your baby experiences excessive crying, it may indicate
colic, marked by prolonged, inconsolable crying. It's crucial
to remain calm and try various calming techniques,
remembering that colic is generally temporary.
Understanding Crying
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 19 Summary : Postpartum
issues for mom
Section Summary
Introduction Postpartum recovery varies; physical and emotional changes require patience.
Breast Care Breastfeeding causes enlargement. Supportive bras and cold compresses can aid comfort.
Breast Self-Awareness Monitor breast changes through self-exams after feeding.
Sore or Cracked Nipples Correct latching and treatments like lanolin can alleviate discomfort.
Blocked Ducts Feed from the affected breast and massage gently; consult a doctor if needed.
Bowel and Urination Problems Stay hydrated and eat fiber-rich foods to address constipation and urinary leakage.
Healing After Birth Mild aches are normal; maintain cleanliness for healing from tears or episiotomies.
Vaginal Discharge Monitor lochia colors; watch for signs of infection.
Getting Back into Shape Reaching pre-pregnancy shape takes time; fatigue is common, so seek support.
Hair and Skin Changes Expect hair loss and skin changes; focus on healthy eating and exercise.
Postpartum Blues Mood changes are typical; seek help if they persist beyond two weeks.
Baby Bonding Bonding takes time; engage with the baby to support emotional development.
Conclusion Adjusting to motherhood involves managing changes and seeking support when needed.
Chapter 19 Summary: Postpartum Issues for Mom
Introduction
Postpartum recovery takes time, and while your body will
adjust, it’s essential to be patient. This chapter covers various
physical and emotional changes after childbirth.
Breast Care
Breastfeeding leads to enlarged breasts, particularly in the
first month. Use a supportive bra and avoid soap on breasts
to minimize discomfort. Expect breast engorgement as milk
production transitions, which can be eased by expressing
milk or applying cold compresses.
Breast Self-Awareness
Post-delivery, be vigilant about breast changes. Conduct
self-exams after feeding when breasts are less full to identify
any lumps.
Sore or Cracked Nipples
Soreness is common initially. Correct latching and gentle
handling are crucial. Using breast milk or lanolin ointment
can help, and consulting a lactation specialist is advised if
pain persists.
Blocked Ducts
A blocked duct can occur and may be tender. Start feedings
with the affected breast and massage gently. Seek medical
assistance if symptoms of infection arise.
Bowel and Urination Problems
Initial bowel movements may be uncomfortable, with
constipation being common. Stay hydrated, maintain a
fiber-rich diet, and consult a provider if issues persist.
Urinary leakage can also occur, and Kegel exercises may
help regain control.
Healing After Birth
Mild aches are normal as the body heals. Uterine cramping
occurs as the uterus returns to size, and afterpains may
intensify with subsequent births. For episiotomies or tears,
ensure cleanliness and consider warm baths for relief.
Vaginal Discharge
Lochia flows in various colors post-delivery, starting bright
red and gradually fading. Monitor for signs of infection, such
as a foul odor or heavy bleeding.
Getting Back into Shape
Returning to pre-pregnancy shape can take time. Expect
fatigue, particularly in the first weeks. Rest when possible
and seek support to manage baby care.
Hair and Skin Changes
Post-delivery, you may experience hair loss and changes in
skin appearance, including the fading of darkened areas.
Weight loss occurs gradually; prioritize healthy eating and
regular exercise for the best results.
Postpartum Blues
Mood changes post-birth are common. Recognize signs and
seek support if feelings persist beyond two weeks, as this
could indicate postpartum depression.
Baby Bonding
Establishing a bond with your newborn can take time. Simple
interactions like holding, talking, and gentle play can foster a
strong connection. Pay attention to your baby’s cues and
engage positively to support their emotional development.
Conclusion
Adjusting to motherhood involves managing physical and
emotional changes. Patience is key, along with seeking help
and support as needed during this transformative time.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The chapter emphasizes the importance of
patience during postpartum recovery.
Critical Interpretation:While the author's guidance on
the necessity of patience is undoubtedly
well-intentioned, one must consider that recovery
experiences can vary significantly from woman to
woman. Thus, the generalization that 'patience is key'
may not universally apply. Research indicates that
individual factors such as physical health, mental
well-being, and support systems can greatly affect
postpartum recovery experiences (e.g., O'Hara & Swain,
1996; Pew Research Center, 2020). This highlights the
complexity of postpartum disorders which may not
always align with the prescribed recovery timetable.
Chapter 20 Summary : Managing as
parents
Managing as Parents
Transition to Parenthood
- The experience of bringing home a newborn brings joy as
well as anxiety. It is normal to feel overwhelmed with new
responsibilities as parents navigate significant life changes.
Early Survival Tips
- Expect chaos: Early weeks may involve fatigue, takeout
meals, and disruption of normal routines.
- Accept help: Allow family and friends to assist with chores
to relieve some stress.
- Set your own approach: Filter unsolicited advice; make
decisions based on what feels right for your family.
- Prioritize self-care: Eat well, exercise, and get rest to better
support your baby.
- Simplify goals: Focus on one task at a time and recognize
small achievements.
- Practice forgiveness: Understand that mistakes are part of
learning to parent.
- Embrace change: Stay flexible with ever-evolving baby
needs and parenting strategies.
- Maintain humor: Find joy and laughter in the challenges of
new parenthood.
Dealing with Sleep Struggles
- Create a conducive sleep environment by managing noise
and brightness.
- If you can't sleep, engage in relaxing activities until you
feel tired again.
- Coordinate sleep time with your partner and share nighttime
duties.
Negotiating Household Chores
- Accept that household tasks may need to be deprioritized
initially.
- Reassess responsibilities between partners to adapt to new
family dynamics.
- Seek help from friends, family, or hired services if
overwhelmed.
Financial Considerations
- Raising a child is expensive; understand major costs such as
housing, food, childcare, transportation, and healthcare.
- Explore ways to save within these categories, like buying
secondhand or utilizing community resources.
Introducing Pets to a New Baby
- Prepare pets by introducing baby-like sounds and scents
before the baby arrives.
- Supervise all interactions between pets and the baby to
ensure safety.
Parenting as a Team
- Recognize the impact of a newborn on relationships; clear
communication and teamwork are essential.
- Balance household duties to prevent resentment and
enhance marital satisfaction.
Creating a Healthy Family Environment
- Healthy families share qualities like support, respect, good
communication, and resilience, fostering a positive
atmosphere.
Finding Personal and Couple Time
- It is crucial for new parents to find time alone and together
to recharge:
- Suggestions for individual time include short outings or
quiet moments at home.
- Couples should prioritize shared activities to strengthen
their bond.
Sex After Pregnancy
- Resuming sexual intimacy requires time for recovery
post-birth; communicate openly about feelings and
expectations.
Single Parenthood
- Single parents face unique challenges but can thrive with
support, consistent childcare, and community involvement.
Conclusion
- Parenting is a rewarding yet demanding journey. Embrace
the challenges, seek help, and cherish the relationship with
your child as you navigate this new chapter together.
Chapter 21 Summary : Genetic screening
Genetic Screening in Pregnancy
Introduction to Genetic Screening
Genetic screening can be a daunting topic for expectant
parents. However, it’s an essential part of prenatal care,
allowing parents to assess the risk of genetic disorders in
their child. Most babies are born healthy, and understanding
genetic screening can guide decisions regarding pregnancy.
What is Genetic Screening?
Genetic screening tests help identify the risk of genetic
disorders in parents or children. These tests can be performed
before conception, during pregnancy, or shortly after birth.
-
Types of Genetic Screening Tests:
- *Family-History-Based Screening*: Identifies genetic
disorders prevalent in family history.
- *Ethnic-Based Screening*: Targets specific racial groups
at higher risk for certain conditions.
- *Expanded Carrier Screening (ECS)*: Screens a wider
range of genetic disorders.
- *Prenatal Screening*: Assesses fetal abnormalities during
early pregnancy.
- *Newborn Screening*: Conducted after birth to identify
treatable conditions.
Types of Genetic Tests
Genetic tests can confirm disorders or assess risk:
- *Diagnostic Testing*: Confirms known conditions based on
symptoms.
- *Presymptomatic Screening*: Identifies risk for adult-onset
disorders.
- *Carrier Testing*: Checks if parents carry genes that could
harm a child.
- *Prenatal Testing*: Detects fetal abnormalities like Down
syndrome.
- *Newborn Screening*: Screens for congenital conditions
ensuring prompt treatment.
Considerations for Genetic Screening
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 22 Summary : Prenatal testing
Section Details
Chapter Title Prenatal Testing
General Overview Expectant parents may feel excitement and anxiety about their baby's health. Over 95% of pregnancies
are healthy, but parents may want more information based on age or family history.
Types of Prenatal
Tests
Screening Tests: Noninvasive tests to assess risk; lead to diagnostic tests if higher risk is
identified.
Diagnostic Tests: Provide definitive information when risks are identified, but carry some
risks.
Considerations for
Prenatal Testing
Utility of information gained
Impact on pregnancy management
Test accuracy
Associated anxiety or stress
Risks of tests
Cost and insurance coverage
Ultrasound
Imaging
Basic Ultrasound: 2-D images of baby development.
Detailed Ultrasound: Thorough examination for suspected issues.
Transvaginal Ultrasound: Provides clearer early images.
3-D and 4-D Ultrasound: For detailed three-dimensional images.
Doppler Ultrasound: Measures blood flow.
Fetal Echocardiography: Focus on the baby’s heart.
Prenatal Screening
Tests
First Trimester Combined Screening: Evaluates risk for Down syndrome and trisomy 18.
Second Trimester Quadruple Screening: Assesses risks for several conditions via blood tests.
Integrated and Serum Integrated Testing: Combines first and second trimester tests for
accuracy.
Cell-free DNA Screening (cfDNA): Analyzes fetal DNA to screen for chromosomal
abnormalities.
Prenatal
Diagnostic Tests
Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS): Samples placenta tissue for genetic testing.
Amniocentesis: Withdraws amniotic fluid for fetal genetic condition analysis.
Fetal Blood Sampling: Samples umbilical cord blood for specific cases.
Section Details
Fetal Surveillance Includes nonstress tests, stress tests, biophysical profiles, and Doppler ultrasounds to monitor fetal health
in late pregnancy.
Conclusion Prenatal testing is essential for informed decision-making about baby’s health. Discussion with
healthcare providers is crucial.
Chapter 22: Prenatal Testing
As expectant parents anticipate the arrival of their baby, they
often grapple with excitement, joy, and anxiety about their
baby's health. While most pregnancies (over 95 percent) are
healthy, some parents may desire more information about
their baby's health before birth, particularly if there are
concerns related to age or family history.
Types of Prenatal Tests
1.
Screening Tests
: Noninvasive tests offered to all pregnant women to
determine the risk of certain conditions. If a screening test
indicates higher risk, diagnostic tests are provided.
2.
Diagnostic Tests
: Offered when a particular risk of a condition is identified.
These tests provide definitive information about specific
conditions but carry some risks.
Considerations for Prenatal Testing
Prenatal tests are optional with unique risks and benefits.
Decisions should consider:
- The utility of the information gained
- The impact on pregnancy management
- Test accuracy
- Associated anxiety or stress
- Risks of proceeding with the test
- Cost and insurance coverage
Ultrasound Imaging
Ultrasound is a common prenatal test that provides insights
into the pregnancy's progress and may identify birth defects.
Several types of ultrasounds include:
-
Basic Ultrasound
: 2-D images showing baby development.
-
Detailed Ultrasound
: Thourough examination for suspected issues or growth
problems.
-
Transvaginal Ultrasound
: Offers clearer images early in pregnancy.
-
3-D and 4-D Ultrasound
: Provides three-dimensional images, occasionally used for
abnormalities.
-
Doppler Ultrasound
: Measures blood flow in the baby’s tissues.
-
Fetal Echocardiography
: Focuses on the baby’s heart.
Prenatal Screening Tests
Key screening tests include:
1.
First Trimester Combined Screening
: Evaluates Down syndrome and trisomy 18 using blood tests
and ultrasound measurements.
2.
Second Trimester Quadruple Screening
: Measures four substances in the mother’s blood to assess
risks for Down syndrome, trisomy 18, neural tube defects,
and abdominal wall defects.
3.
Integrated and Serum Integrated Testing
: Combines first and second trimester components to improve
accuracy.
4.
Cell-free DNA Screening (cfDNA)
: Analyzes fetal DNA in the mother’s blood to screen for
chromosomal abnormalities with high accuracy.
Prenatal Diagnostic Tests
If initial screenings indicate risk, diagnostic options include:
1.
Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)
: Samples placenta tissue early in pregnancy for genetic
testing.
2.
Amniocentesis
: Involves withdrawing amniotic fluid later in pregnancy to
analyze fetal genetic conditions.
3.
Fetal Blood Sampling
: Samples blood from the umbilical cord for rare situations
involving fetal anemia or genetic testing.
Fetal Surveillance
Late pregnancy tests may include nonstress tests, stress tests,
biophysical profiles, and Doppler ultrasounds to monitor
fetal health. Results can guide decisions regarding potential
interventions or deliveries.
In summary, prenatal testing is a crucial component of
modern pregnancy care, allowing parents to make informed
decisions about their baby's health. Discussing options with
healthcare providers ensures understanding and alignment
with personal values and circumstances.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The necessity and implications of prenatal
testing; weighing benefits against the potential risks
and emotional toll.
Critical Interpretation:While prenatal testing provides
valuable information about fetal health, it is essential to
critically evaluate the necessity of these tests, as they
can introduce anxiety and carry potential risks. Parents
should consider factors such as their personal health
history and the accuracy of test results, rather than
solely relying on the information presented in the Mayo
Clinic Guide. Decisions around testing should be made
in consultation with healthcare providers, who can help
navigate the complexities of these tests. Furthermore,
studies have shown that an emphasis on informed
consent and understanding can influence the
decision-making process regarding prenatal tests
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021). Readers should recognize that while the guide
aims to be informative, not all medical professionals
may share the same opinions on the necessity and
practicality of multiple testing options.
Chapter 23 Summary : Breast-feeding
Breast-feeding
Introduction
- Mothers often face the decision to breast-feed or
formula-feed their babies, with breast milk being the
preferred option due to its nutritional benefits and immune
support.
Learning About Breast-feeding
- Educate yourself about breast-feeding as misconceptions
are common.
- The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
exclusive breast-feeding for the first six months.
Milk Production
- Milk production starts during pregnancy and increases
shortly after birth.
- The let-down reflex, triggered by suckling, releases milk for
the baby.
Benefits for Baby
- Breast milk provides ideal nutrition, strengthens the
immune system, aids digestion, and may reduce the risk of
certain diseases and obesity.
Benefits for Mother
- Breast-feeding promotes faster recovery from childbirth,
suppresses ovulation, and may reduce the risk of certain
cancers and diseases.
Pros and Cons of Breast-feeding
- Pros: Convenience, cost savings, emotional bonding.
- Cons: Exclusivity for mother, potential restrictions on
alcohol and medication, sore nipples, and possible physical
discomfort.
Vitamin D Supplementation
- Consult your baby's doctor about vitamin D supplements
since breast milk may lack sufficient amounts for strong
bones.
When Breast-feeding Isn't Possible
- Various health concerns may necessitate bottle-feeding
instead of breast-feeding. Always consult your care provider
if you have concerns.
Getting Started
- Begin breast-feeding shortly after birth for best results.
Seek assistance from hospital staff or lactation consultants if
needed.
Nursing Basics
- Proper positioning is crucial to avoid discomfort.
Experiment with different positions to find what works best.
Keeping Yourself Healthy
- Maintain a balanced diet and stay hydrated while nursing.
It’s encouraged to seek rest when possible.
Breast Care
- Manage common breast-feeding issues like engorgement,
sore nipples, and blocked milk ducts promptly. Consult
experts if needed.
Breast-feeding Multiples
- It's possible to successfully breast-feed twins or more,
requiring some planning and support.
Pumping Your Breasts
- Pumping allows flexibility; choose between manual and
electric pumps based on your needs.
Storing Breast Milk
- Follow guidelines for safe storage and thawing of breast
milk to maintain its quality.
Introducing a Bottle
- Once breast-feeding is well-established, introduce a bottle
to allow others to help with feedings.
Going Back to Work
- Plan how to manage breast-feeding and work
responsibilities. Expressing milk can ensure your baby
receives breast milk while you are away.
Donor Milk
- If you cannot provide breast milk, consider using donor
milk from a reputable source.
Breast or Bottle: Feeding Tips
- Feed on cue, allowing your baby to guide the pace, whether
breast-feeding or formula-feeding.
Bottle-feeding
- Infant formula is a safe alternative to breast milk, designed
to meet infant nutritional needs. It's essential to choose
formula correctly, as cow's milk is not suitable for infants.
Pros and Cons of Bottle-feeding
- Pros: Flexibility and shared feeding responsibilities.
Example
Key Point:The Importance of Breast-feeding
Education
Example:Understanding the benefits and techniques of
breast-feeding can empower you to make informed
choices for your baby's health.
Chapter 24 Summary : Pain relief during
childbirth
Pain Relief During Childbirth
Choosing Pain Management
The best pain management during labor varies by individual
preferences and the progression of labor. Each woman's pain
tolerance is different, and so is the nature of each labor.
Some women may require minimal to no medication, while
others find that pain relief allows them to feel more in
control. It is important to discuss pain relief options with
your care provider and to remain flexible, as labor may not
go as planned. Remember, asking for pain relief does not
equate to failing.
Key Considerations for Pain Relief Options
When evaluating pain relief methods, consider the following
questions:
- What is involved in the method?
- How will it affect me and my baby?
- How quickly does it work, and how long does the relief
last?
- Does it require prior organization or practice?
- Can it be combined with other methods?
- Is it usable at home before heading to the hospital?
- When is it available during labor?
Role of a Doula
A doula facilitates labor support but does not replace the
medical team. Their roles include:
- Providing emotional and physical support.
- Offering guidance on comfort techniques and labor
positions.
- Acting as an intermediary for communication with
healthcare providers.
- Educating expectant parents about labor processes.
Finding a Doula
Doulas can be located through hospitals, birthing centers, or
recommendations from your doctor. Their fees vary, and
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 25 Summary : Elective cesarean
birth
Elective Cesarean Birth
Elective cesarean delivery is a choice some women make
during a healthy pregnancy, often for reasons like
convenience or fear of labor. It’s important to discuss your
motivations and concerns with a healthcare provider.
Issues to Consider
Opinions regarding elective cesareans vary among healthcare
providers. While some support a woman's right to choose,
others highlight the risks involved and lack of convincing
evidence in favor of elective C-sections. Thorough research
and honest self-reflection are essential before making a
decision.
Benefits vs. Risks
*Maternal Benefits:*
-
Protection Against Incontinence:
C-sections may reduce immediate urinary issues, but
long-term benefits are unclear.
-
Avoidance of Emergency C-Section:
Planned surgeries have lower risks than emergency
procedures.
-
Easier Labor Management:
Elective C-sections bypass the complications of difficult
labor.
-
Reduced Rates of Postpartum Hemorrhage:
They lower hemorrhage risks compared to vaginal and
emergency births.
-
Scheduling Convenience:
Knowing the date can provide mental comfort.
*Maternal Risks (Short Term):*
-
Longer Recovery:
C-sections often involve longer hospital stays.
-
Infection Risks:
Surgical deliveries come with higher infection rates.
-
Surgical Complications:
Birth via C-section carries inherent surgical risks.
-
Initial Bonding Issues:
Immediate newborn care may be delayed post-surgery.
-
Insurance Coverage:
Some policies may not cover elective C-sections.
*Maternal Risks (Long Term):*
-
Future Complications:
Each succeeding C-section can increase complications.
-
Uterine Rupture:
Risks are present if a vaginal birth is attempted after a
C-section.
-
Placental Problems:
Previous C-sections heighten the risk of significant placental
issues.
-
Hysterectomy Risk:
Serious placental issues could require hysterectomy.
-
Bladder/Bowel Injury:
Likelihood of injury increases with repeat surgeries.
*Fetal Risks:*
-
Respiratory Issues:
Babies born via C-section may face breathing difficulties.
-
Prematurity:
Timing inaccuracies could lead to premature delivery.
-
Cuts/Lacerations:
Though rare, there’s a slight risk of injury during delivery.
Making Your Decision
A healthcare provider should discuss the potential downsides
of elective C-sections. If your provider supports your request
without reservations, consider their motivations. Being
well-informed is crucial to making a safe and responsible
decision regarding your childbirth method.
Chapter 26 Summary : Vaginal birth
after a cesarean birth
Vaginal Birth After Cesarean (VBAC)
Introduction
Many women who have previously delivered by cesarean
(C-section) may wish to pursue a vaginal birth in subsequent
pregnancies. VBAC, or trial of labor after cesarean
(TOLAC), is an option for many women today, although it
carries risks that need to be weighed with the help of a
healthcare provider.
Benefits vs. Risks
Benefits of VBAC
- Generally safer than a C-section as it avoids major surgery.
- Reduced risk of blood transfusions and infections.
- Shorter hospital stay (1-2 days compared to 3 or more).
- Lower risk of hemorrhage and future surgeries.
- Enhanced energy post childbirth and faster return to normal
activities.
- Increased involvement in the delivery process.
Risks of VBAC
- Possibility of unsuccessful vaginal delivery, leading to a
repeat C-section, which can carry its own risks.
- Risk of uterine rupture, although it is low, can be
life-threatening and may require a hysterectomy.
- Emotional and physical toll of a failed VBAC attempt.
Factors to Consider
Potential Candidates for VBAC
The eligibility for VBAC depends largely on the type of
uterine incision from the previous C-section and the reasons
behind it:
-
Types of Uterine Incisions
- *Low Transverse Incision*: Common and typically the
safest for VBAC.
- *Low Vertical Incision*: Generally acceptable for VBAC
with no significant evidence of increased rupture risk.
- *Classical Incision*: Not recommended for VBAC due to
higher risks.
- *Unknown Incision*: Most women with unknown
incisions can still consider VBAC, unless a classical incision
is suspected.
-
Reasons for Previous C-Section
Successful VBAC likelihood increases if the prior C-section
was for non-recurring issues. A history of vaginal delivery
also enhances chances.
Who Might Not Be a Candidate
A repeat C-section may be indicated in cases such as:
- Prior classical or T-shaped incisions.
- Previous uterine rupture.
- Significant medical complications preventing vaginal
delivery.
- Facilities lacking emergency C-section capabilities.
Tips for Planning a VBAC
- Communicate fears and expectations with your care
provider.
- Ensure the medical team is aware of your complete medical
history.
- Consider a VBAC class with a labor coach to alleviate
concerns.
- Choose a well-equipped hospital with resources for
continuous fetal monitoring and rapid surgical response.
- Avoid certain medications that may raise uterine rupture
risks.
- Engage actively in your preparation through healthy
lifestyle choices.
The focus should remain on achieving a healthy outcome for
both mother and baby, regardless of the delivery method.
Chapter 27 Summary : Contraception
after delivery
Chapter 26: Contraception After Delivery
Overview
Postpartum contraception is crucial as women can conceive
before their first menstrual period after childbirth. Early
conception, particularly within 18 months of delivery, may
carry health risks for both mother and baby.
Types of Birth Control Methods
1.
Hormonal Methods:
- Birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, and injections
that prevent ovulation.
2.
Barrier Methods:
- Condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and spermicides
that block sperm from reaching eggs.
3.
Intrauterine Devices (IUDs):
- Copper IUDs (ParaGard) and hormonal IUDs (Mirena,
Skyla) that prevent fertilization.
4.
Permanent Methods:
- Tubal ligation, hysteroscopic sterilization (Essure), and
vasectomy for irreversible contraception.
5.
Natural Family Planning:
- Methods like the rhythm method and monitoring basal
body temperature to avoid intercourse during fertile periods.
Considerations for Choosing a Method
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 28 Summary : PART 5:
Symptoms guide
Symptom Causes Prevention/Self-Care When to Seek Help
Abdominal
Discomfort
Stretching of ligaments and
muscles supporting the uterus.
Resting or soaking in warm water. Severe or persistent pain,
especially with bleeding or
fever.
Acne Increased oil secretion from
hormones.
Good skin hygiene, avoid irritants,
non-comedogenic products.
Consult a doctor before
medication use.
Allergies Nasal swelling leading to
congestion and allergy-like
symptoms.
Self-care remedies. Severe symptoms that don't
improve with self-care.
Baby's
Movements
Feeling of hiccups and movements
from week 15.
Monitor movement patterns. Reduced activity warrants a
check-up.
Backache Changes in posture and weight
distribution.
Good posture, proper lifting
techniques, regular exercise.
N/A
Blurry
Vision
Changes in fluid retention affecting
eyesight.
N/A Sudden blurry vision or
headaches.
Breast
Changes
Colostrum leakage, hormonal
changes.
Wear supportive bras. N/A
Constipation Hormonal changes and pressure
from the uterus.
High-fiber diet, hydration, regular
exercise.
N/A
False vs.
True Labor
Monitoring contractions. N/A Differentiate between Braxton
Hicks and true labor.
Dizziness
and
Faintness
Circulatory changes and low blood
sugar.
Move slowly, stay hydrated, avoid
long periods standing.
N/A
Fatigue Hormonal changes and physical
demands.
Prioritize rest, maintain a balanced
diet.
N/A
Heartburn Hormonal changes and pressure on
stomach.
Smaller meals, avoid trigger foods,
consider elevation while sleeping.
N/A
Nasal
Congestion
Hormonal effects on nasal tissues. Use humidifiers and saline rinses. N/A
Nesting
Instinct
A strong desire to prepare home. N/A N/A
Sensitivity
to Smells
Heightened sense of smell
triggering nausea.
Avoid odors that provoke nausea. N/A
Urinary
Changes
Increased frequency due to bladder
pressure, risk of UTIs.
Drink lots of fluids, maintain hygiene. N/A
Leg and Hip
Pain
Changes in joint laxity and weight
distribution.
Stretching and mobility exercises. N/A
PART 5 Symptoms Guide
Pregnancy can bring various concerns, including acne,
morning sickness, fatigue, heartburn, and more. This guide
provides tips and insights for managing common pregnancy
symptoms.
Abdominal Discomfort
-
Causes
: Often due to the stretching of ligaments and muscles
supporting the uterus as it expands.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Resting or soaking in warm water can help alleviate
discomfort.
-
When to Seek Help
: Severe or persistent pain may require medical evaluation,
especially if accompanied by bleeding or fever.
Acne
-
Causes
: Increased oil secretion from hormones can lead to acne.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Maintain good skin hygiene, avoid irritants, and use
non-comedogenic products.
-
Medical Care
: Consult a doctor before using any medication.
Allergies
-
Causes
: Pregnancy may cause nasal swelling, leading to congestion
and allergy-like symptoms.
-
When to Seek Help
: Severe symptoms that don't improve with self-care require
medical attention.
Baby's Movements
-
Hiccups and Kicks
: Starting around week 15, you may feel your baby's hiccups
and movements, known as quickening.
-
Monitoring
: Observe changes in movement patterns; reduced activity
could warrant a check-up.
Backache
-
Causes
: Changes in posture and weight distribution can lead to back
pain.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Good posture, proper lifting techniques, and regular
exercise can help.
Blurry Vision
-
Causes
: Changes in fluid retention can affect eyesight during
pregnancy.
-
When to Seek Help
: Sudden blurry vision or accompanying headaches should be
reported to a healthcare provider.
Breast Changes
-
Discharge
: Colostrum leakage may occur as your due date approaches.
-
Enlargement and Tenderness
: Hormonal changes lead to increased breast size and
sensitivity; wearing supportive bras can help manage
discomfort.
Constipation
-
Causes
: Hormonal changes and pressure from the uterus slow
digestion.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: High-fiber diet, hydration, and regular exercise can help.
False vs. True Labor
-
Contractions
: Monitor the frequency and intensity of contractions to
differentiate between false labor (Braxton Hicks) and true
labor.
Dizziness and Faintness
-
Causes
: Circulatory changes and low blood sugar may cause
dizziness.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Move slowly, stay hydrated, and avoid standing for long
periods.
Fatigue
-
Causes
: Hormonal changes and physical demands of pregnancy can
lead to tiredness.
-
Self-Care
: Prioritize rest and maintain a balanced diet for energy.
Heartburn
-
Causes
: Hormonal changes and pressure on the stomach can lead to
acid reflux.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Eat smaller meals, avoid trigger foods, and consider
elevation while sleeping.
Nasal Congestion
-
Causes
: It is common due to hormonal effects on nasal tissues.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Use humidifiers and saline rinses for relief.
Nesting Instinct
-
Description
: A strong desire to prepare your home before the baby
arrives.
Sensitivity to Smells
-
Effects
: Heightened sense of smell can trigger nausea.
-
Prevention
: Identify and avoid odors that provoke nausea.
Urinary Changes
-
Increased Frequency
: Normal early in pregnancy due to bladder pressure.
-
Urinary Tract Infections
: Important to manage; drink lots of fluids and maintain
hygiene.
Leg and Hip Pain
-
Causes
: Due to changes in joint laxity and weight distribution.
-
Self-Care
: Stretching and mobility exercises can help relieve
discomfort.
Throughout the pregnancy, if any symptom feels abnormal or
concerning, it’s essential to reach out to a healthcare provider
for advice and management.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The guide emphasizes self-care in
managing common pregnancy symptoms.
Critical Interpretation:The author's recommendation to
focus on self-care and preventative measures during
pregnancy is essential for maintaining maternal
well-being. However, it may inadvertently suggest that
such symptoms should always be manageable without
professional intervention. In truth, while self-care
strategies like diet and hydration can provide relief,
there could be underlying health issues that need
medical attention. To portray pregnancy as a solely
self-managed experience may limit the understanding of
the full spectrum of maternal health. Sources such as
'The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists' highlight the significance of regular
check-ups and professional guidance, urging that
symptoms should not always be dismissed as normal.
Chapter 29 Summary : Issues during
pregnancy
CHAPTER 27: Issues During Pregnancy
If unexpected problems arise during pregnancy, women may
feel concerned or frightened. This chapter discusses
complications that can occur and their treatments,
emphasizing the importance of understanding these issues
and following healthcare provider advice.
Blood Complications
-
Rhesus Factor Incompatibility:
Occurs when an Rh-negative mother carries an Rh-positive
baby, leading to the mother producing antibodies that can
harm future pregnancies. Treatment involves Rh immune
globulin (RhIg) to prevent antibody formation.
-
Iron Deficiency Anemia:
Common in the second half of pregnancy, caused by
insufficient iron to produce red blood cells. Symptoms
include fatigue, weakness, and pallor. Treatment typically
involves iron supplements or blood transfusions if severe.
Cervical Incompetence:
A condition where the cervix opens prematurely without
contractions, potentially leading to second-trimester losses.
Symptoms may include spotting or pelvic pressure.
Treatment can involve a cerclage, stitching the cervix to
support the pregnancy.
Depression:
Common during and after pregnancy, with symptoms like
persistent low mood, loss of interest in daily activities, and
sleep disturbances. Treatment includes counseling, therapy,
and possibly safe antidepressant medications. Emergency
help is essential for suicidal thoughts.
Early Labor:
Preterm labor involves contractions before 37 weeks,
potentially causing complications for the baby. Risk factors
include previous preterm births, multiple pregnancies, and
certain health issues. Management involves monitoring and
possible progesterone therapy.
-
Bed Rest and Activity Restriction:
Previously common, bed rest is no longer recommended due
to risks like blood clots. Activity restrictions may be
suggested instead, depending on the complication.
Excessive Vomiting:
Known as hyperemesis gravidarum, this severe form of
vomiting can lead to dehydration and malnutrition.
Treatment may include medication and IV fluids.
Fetal Growth Restriction (FGR):
Diagnosed through ultrasound when a fetus grows slower
than normal. Causes may include placental issues or maternal
health factors. Monitoring and possibly early delivery are
essential to improve outcomes.
Gestational Diabetes:
Develops when the body cannot effectively manage blood
sugar during pregnancy, with risks including high birth
weight and complications for both mother and baby.
Management includes diet control and blood sugar
monitoring.
Infections During Pregnancy:
Pregnant women remain susceptible to various infections.
Important ones include:
-
Chickenpox:
Serious if contracted late in pregnancy, manageable with
Varizig.
-
Cytomegalovirus (CMV):
Can cause severe congenital infections; hygiene is crucial.
-
Fifth Disease:
Generally harmless, but can cause severe anemia in the
fetus.
-
Influenza:
Vaccination recommended; antiviral treatment beneficial.
-
German Measles:
Dangerous during pregnancy; vaccination post-childbirth is
recommended.
-
Group B Streptococcus:
Treated with antibiotics during labor to prevent neonatal
infections.
-
Listeriosis and Toxoplasmosis:
Preventable through food safety and hygiene practices.
-
Tuberculosis and Zika Virus:
Active TB can be treated safely during pregnancy, while
Zika infections pose serious risks, necessitating avoidance of
exposure.
Placental Problems
-
Placental Abruption:
Premature separation from the uterus; can lead to severe
complications. Management depends on the severity and
gestational age.
-
Placenta Previa:
The placenta covers the cervix, posing bleeding risks.
Management involves monitoring, activity restrictions, and
potential cesarean delivery if necessary.
Preeclampsia and Hypertension:
Characterized by high blood pressure and protein in urine
after the 20th week, it requires careful monitoring and may
necessitate early delivery to protect both mother and baby.
Risks of future cardiovascular issues increase postpartum.
Overall, many pregnancy complications can be managed
effectively with proper medical care and support. Awareness
and proactive discussions with healthcare providers are vital
for successful outcomes during pregnancy.
Example
Key Point:Understanding and addressing pregnancy
complications is crucial for a healthy outcome.
Example:Imagine being weeks away from meeting your
little one, yet facing the fear of sudden complications
like high blood pressure or gestational diabetes. It's vital
to prepare for these unexpected issues by staying
informed about potential warning signs. By attending
regular check-ups and following your healthcare
provider's advice, you empower yourself to manage
risks effectively, ensuring optimal conditions for both
you and your baby. This proactive approach not only
alleviates anxiety but also increases the chances of a
safe and healthy pregnancy journey.
Chapter 30 Summary : Problems of
labor and childbirth
Chapter 28: Problems of Labor and Childbirth
Introduction
Even with proper preparation, complications during labor
and delivery can arise. It's important to trust your healthcare
team and remain flexible. Communication with your care
provider is essential to understand concerns and create a
comfortable care plan.
Labor That Fails to Start
-
Induction of Labor
: If labor does not start naturally, induction may be
recommended for health reasons or timing (e.g., after 41
weeks).
-
Induction Methods
: Cervical ripening can be achieved through medication (e.g.,
misoprostol, dinoprostone) or mechanical techniques (e.g.,
balloon catheter).
-
Oxytocin
: A common method for inducing labor, administered
intravenously, enhancing contractions during labor.
Labor That Fails to Progress
-
Dystocia
: Poor progress may result from inadequate contractions,
baby's position, or pelvic size. Treatments include
medication to stimulate contractions, breaking the water, or,
if necessary, cesarean delivery.
-
Prolonged Labor
: Early labor can last longer for first-time mothers. If
progress halts, rest or walking may be recommended.
-
Prolonged Pushing
: Defined as over three hours for first-time mothers or two for
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 31 Summary : Managing mom’s
health concerns
Summary of Chapter 31: Managing Mom's Health
Concerns
Pre-existing Health Conditions
Pregnancy requires careful health management, especially
when pre-existing health issues are involved. Common
conditions include:
-
Asthma
: Proper medication and management can prevent
complications.
-
Cancer
: Treatment may need to be adjusted during pregnancy to
protect the mother and fetus.
-
Depression
: It's crucial to manage depression to ensure the health of
both mother and baby, including possible adjustments in
medications.
-
Diabetes
: Blood sugar control is vital as uncontrolled diabetes can
lead to serious birth defects and complications.
-
Epilepsy
: Continuation of seizure medications is important for the
mother and baby's safety.
-
Heart Disease
: Monitoring is essential, as pregnancy increases stress on the
cardiovascular system.
-
Hepatitis B
: Management focuses on preventing transmission to the
baby during birth.
Specific Health Concerns
Several health issues that require special attention during
pregnancy include:
-
High Blood Pressure
: Requires careful monitoring and potential medication
adjustments.
-
Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura (ITP)
: Low platelet counts must be managed, especially regarding
delivery methods.
-
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD)
: Control of symptoms is key for a healthy pregnancy.
-
Lupus
: Active lupus poses risks during pregnancy that must be
managed by specialists.
-
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
: Diet management preconception and during pregnancy is
crucial to prevent fetal damage.
-
Rheumatoid Arthritis
: Treatment adjustments may be required, but many women
report symptom improvement during pregnancy.
Infections and STIs
Undiagnosed infections can lead to serious complications.
Key infections to be aware of include:
-
Chlamydia & Gonorrhea
: Can cause miscarriage and complications during delivery.
-
Herpes
: Risk of transmission at delivery necessitates monitoring and
possibly a C-section.
-
HIV/AIDS
: Routine testing and management can minimize transmission
risk to the baby.
-
Syphilis
: Requires early screening and treatment due to potential fetal
complications.
Postpartum Care
After delivery, new mothers face potential health concerns,
including:
-
Blood Clots (DVT)
: Increased risk post-cesarean; symptoms include leg
tenderness and swelling.
-
Excessive Bleeding
: Can result from uterine atony, retained placenta, or
lacerations.
-
Infections
: Common issues include endometritis and mastitis, needing
prompt treatment.
-
Postpartum Depression
: Recognizing symptoms early and seeking intervention is
vital for recovery.
Self-Care for Postpartum Depression
New mothers should prioritize:
- Rest and nutrition.
- Physical activity and social connections.
- Seeking support and making time for self-care to aid
recovery.
This chapter emphasizes the importance of managing both
pre-existing and new health issues for the well-being of
mothers and their babies during and after pregnancy.
Chapter 32 Summary : Pregnancy loss
Pregnancy Loss: An Overview
Pregnancy loss encompasses various events such as
miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, molar pregnancy, preterm
birth, and stillbirth, often bringing with it grief, confusion,
and a complex array of emotions. Understanding the types
and causes of these losses can aid in coping and planning for
future pregnancies.
Miscarriage
*Definition and Frequency*
- Miscarriage is the spontaneous loss of a pregnancy before
20 weeks, affecting approximately 20% of known
pregnancies, though actual rates may be higher.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- Symptoms can include vaginal spotting, abdominal pain,
and passing of fluid or tissue. Infection can occur, leading to
septic miscarriage symptoms like fever and chills.
*Causes*
- Most miscarriages arise from chromosomal abnormalities,
often spontaneous, rather than inherited. Risk factors include
advanced maternal and paternal age, history of previous
miscarriages, and lifestyle factors like smoking and alcohol
use.
*Types of Miscarriages*
-
Threatened Miscarriage:
Bleeding without cervix dilation.
-
Inevitable Miscarriage:
Bleeding and dilation present.
-
Incomplete Miscarriage:
Some tissue remains in the uterus.
-
Missed Miscarriage:
Embryo dies but remains in utero.
-
Complete Miscarriage:
All tissue passed.
-
Septic Miscarriage:
Infection present.
*Diagnosis*
- Consulting a doctor is crucial for evaluation, potentially
involving pelvic exams, ultrasounds, and blood tests.
*Treatment Options*
- Management varies from observation to medical
(medications) or surgical (D&C) interventions, depending on
individual circumstances and preferences.
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss
*Definition and Causes*
- Characterized by two or more consecutive losses,
potentially arising from genetic issues, anatomical anomalies,
or blood clotting conditions.
*Emotional and Procedural Considerations*
- Emotional support is vital; understanding the causes may
guide future pregnancies. Follow-up care tailored to
individual histories can enhance chances of success in
subsequent pregnancies.
Recovery from Loss
*Physical Recovery*
- Generally swift, lasting from days to weeks, with return to
normal menstrual cycles expected within a month. Emotional
healing may take longer and varies significantly between
individuals.
*Emotional Healing*
- Grieving is essential. Seeking support and allowing oneself
to process emotions are critical to recovery.
Ectopic Pregnancy
*Definition*
- Occurs when a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus,
often in a fallopian tube, posing severe risks to maternal
health.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- Symptoms include sharp pelvic pain and abnormal
bleeding; immediate medical consultation is necessary upon
presentation.
*Treatment*
- Management may involve medication like methotrexate or
surgical interventions to prevent complications.
Molar Pregnancy
*Definition and Types*
- A rare condition resulting from abnormal placental
development, potentially leading to a complete or partial
mole.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- Characterized by abnormal bleeding and enlarged uterus,
typically diagnosed via ultrasound.
*Treatment*
- Requires surgical intervention (D&C) and careful
monitoring of HCG levels post-treatment.
Stillbirth
*Definition and Causes*
- Characterizes the loss of a baby after 20 weeks. Causes may
include genetic issues, placental problems, or maternal health
complications, often remaining unexplained.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- A notable reduction in fetal movement could indicate
issues, necessitating immediate medical evaluation.
*Treatment and Coping Strategies*
- Induction of labor is common for delivery, along with
emotional support strategies like naming the baby and
memorializing the loss.
Coping with Pregnancy Loss
*Strategies for Grieving*
- Accepting the need to grieve is vital. Connection with
supportive individuals helps in the healing process.
*Considerations for Future Pregnancies*
- Medical evaluation may reveal factors affecting prior
losses, and each pregnancy should be closely monitored.
*Partner Support*
- Partners must recognize and respond to each other's grief
differently for effective support.
Conclusion
Pregnancy loss, whether through miscarriage, ectopic
pregnancy, molar pregnancy, or stillbirth, is a challenging
experience that necessitates physical and emotional recovery.
Open communication, support from healthcare providers, and
connection to loved ones are essential for navigating this
difficult journey.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:Understanding the diversity of pregnancy
loss impacts emotional healing.
Critical Interpretation:The author asserts that grasping
the various types of pregnancy loss can facilitate coping
with grief; however, it's crucial to recognize that
individual experiences vary significantly. Some may not
find solace in the categorization of losses, as the
emotional weight of such events transcends definitions.
Research indicates that emotional healing is deeply
personal and can differ widely among individuals,
suggesting that the author's framework may not
universally apply (Bennett et al., 2015). This
perspective invites readers to critically evaluate the
one-size-fits-all approach to grieving and consider
alternative healing methods.

Best Quotes from Mayo Clinic Guide to a
Healthy Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick by
Myra J. Wick with Page Numbers
View on Bookey Website and Generate Beautiful Quote Images
Chapter 1 | Quotes From Pages 14-62
1.Having a child is a wonderful experience that will
enrich your life forever.
2.If you’re reading this book and are still in the planning
stages before becoming pregnant, you’re giving yourself a
head start on the exhilarating, sometimes bewildering path
toward parenthood.
3.Questions to ask: Why do I want to have a baby?
4.Taking steps to be healthy and informed now can help set
you up to enjoy a healthy pregnancy.
5.Your partner’s health and lifestyle — including family
medical history and risk factors for infections or birth
defects — are important because they, too, can affect you
and your baby.
6.The sooner you set the stage for a successful outcome, the
better your odds.
7.Make healthy lifestyle choices. Maintain a healthy weight,
include physical activity in your daily routine, eat a healthy
diet, limit caffeine and keep stress under control.
8.You don’t have to be exceptionally fit to have a child, but if
you’re healthy to begin with, you have a better chance of
enjoying a healthy pregnancy.
9.If you decide to return to work, do I have access to good
child care?
Chapter 2 | Quotes From Pages 63-148
1.A new baby on the way is a great reason to take
stock of your current lifestyle.
2.Eating well helps create ideal conditions for early fetal
development.
3.If you can remember these key principles, you and baby
will be well on your way to a balanced diet.
4.If you’re pregnant with twins or other multiples, you’ll
likely need more nutrients and calories.
5.Pregnancy is the one time in your life when you can gain as
much weight as you want and not worry about it.
6.Exercise can help reduce common pregnancy complaints,
such as back pain.
7.Regular exercise can help you prepare for labor and
childbirth by increasing your stamina and muscle strength.
8.Your body uses iron to produce hemoglobin, a substance in
red blood cells that carries oxygen.
9.Pregnancy isn’t the time to try to lose weight.
10.Seek advice on supplements. Many vegans need a vitamin
B-12 supplement.
Chapter 3 | Quotes From Pages 149-180
1.If you’re an expectant parent — but not the
pregnant one — you may be wondering how you
fit into this adventure.
2.There’s plenty you can do to feel less like a bystander and
more like an active participant in your expanding family.
3.Talk and sing to your baby while massaging your partner’s
belly.
4.Support your partner in a healthy lifestyle.
5.Pregnancy-related hormonal patterns in men tend to mirror
those of women in general.
6.To help ease the way for your partner (and yourself),
consider these tips: Minimize nausea triggers.
7.You’re a parent, and a whole new path has opened up to
you.

Chapter 4 | Quotes From Pages 181-189
1.When in doubt, it’s better to be safe than sorry.
2.Pregnancy doesn’t divide itself evenly into months.
3.If you’re at high risk of gestational diabetes.
Chapter 5 | Quotes From Pages 190-221
1.... we were expecting our first child!
2.Pregnancy can be a wild ride. Try to relax, and enjoy the
adventure to its fullest!
3.The process begins when you and your partner have sexual
intercourse. When he ejaculates, your partner releases into
your vagina semen containing up to 1 billion sperm cells.
4.... at this point, your egg is about 1/200 of an inch in
diameter, too small to be seen.
5.Fertilization is now complete. Weeks 3 and 4 Once your
baby is conceived, he or she gets to work right away.
6.Your emotions are all over the place, because they will be.
Pregnancy can be exciting, boring, satisfying... sometimes
all at once.
7.... your emotions are strongly influenced by the support
you receive from your partner and family.
Chapter 6 | Quotes From Pages 222-263
1.It’s probably a cliché, but when it happens to you,
inside you, it feels like a miracle.
2.Your baby’s first heartbeats occur at 21 to 22 days after
conception.
3.If you’re concerned about early miscarriage, concentrate on
taking good care of yourself and your baby.
4.Your emotions... Pregnancy is a psychological journey as
well as a biological one.
5.Anticipation is a normal part of making the transition to
parenthood.

Chapter 7 | Quotes From Pages 264-287
1.I feel like my body is preparing me for
motherhood by reminding me what it’s like to be a
child. I eat every three hours, want things I don’t
need, cry because I’m tired and I’ve become a bit
of a narcissist.
2.Hang in there — you will start to feel better soon!
3.Simply put, you may feel fat. Try to remember that your
body is changing for the important work of growing and
nurturing your baby.
4.Your increased blood volume and increased production of
the hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) are
working together to give you that pregnancy glow.
5.Most women, while interest in intercourse continues during
pregnancy, it may decrease a bit. This is perfectly normal.
Chapter 8 | Quotes From Pages 288-318
1.One down and two to go! The beginning of the
second trimester is generally a time of relief for
most pregnant women.
2.You’ve made it past the first three months — the stage of
pregnancy when pregnancy loss is most common.
3.Enjoy this time. Get out and do the things you love.
4.The skeletal and nervous systems have made enough
connections to signal movements of the limbs and body.
5.You may feel a little scatterbrained or forgetful. This is
normal, no matter how organized you were (or weren’t)
before pregnancy.
6.The bond between parent and child is unique and can’t be
replaced.
Chapter 9 | Quotes From Pages 319-338
1.It is the most amazing feeling — it feels like
someone is tickling me lightly from the inside.
2.Feeling your baby flip, kick or punch for the first time ... is
a great source of wonder and reassurance for most women.
3.Your baby may be swallowing a good dose of amniotic
fluid every day.
4.Make a note of the date, and tell your care provider at your
next visit.
5.Your emotions ... may bring a sense of reality.

Chapter 10 | Quotes From Pages 339-362
1.I’m starting to get really excited, and I wonder a
lot about what the baby will look like.
2.If your little one was born at the end of this month, he or
she would have about a 50 percent chance of survival. The
odds get better with each passing week as baby’s lungs and
other organs continue crucial development.
3.On the bright side, the long-term outlook for premature
babies is improving each year as knowledge in the field of
neonatal medicine continues to expand.
4.Take time to sit down and make a list of your fears, and ask
your partner to do the same. Then compare lists and share
these concerns with your care provider.
5.You may want to enjoy this feeling while it lasts — and
before your baby arrives, which will likely affect your sex
life.
6.Routine visits often mean everything is going well and
progressing on schedule.
7.The biggest difference between true labor and Braxton
Hicks contractions is the effect on your cervix.
Chapter 11 | Quotes From Pages 363-387
1.If you want to get them, fine. But they’re for you.
Your baby only needs to be comfortable, well-fed
and, most of all, loved.
2.Enjoy a little break Slow down, sit back and relax — while
you can.
3.Your baby may start recognizing your voice this week, as
well as your partner’s.
4.If you don’t want the touch but aren’t comfortable speaking
up, you may try to cover your belly with your own hands
first, as a gentle reminder that it’s your own body.
5.If you think you prefer to formula-feed your baby, make
sure you’ve learned about breast-feeding and its benefits
before solidifying your decision.
Chapter 12 | Quotes From Pages 388-424
1.Your baby is also developing a sleep and wake
cycle. During periods of sleep, baby will be quiet.
2.A significant drop in fetal activity in the last trimester of
pregnancy may indicate a problem with the umbilical cord
or placenta.
3.The best sleep position at this point is on your side. The left
side is preferable to allow for maximum blood flow, but
either side is fine.
4.It’s one of the most annoying side effects of pregnancy, but
it won’t last forever. It generally disappears after baby is
born.
5.Your provider may want to check the condition of your
baby. Usually, everything is fine.

Chapter 13 | Quotes From Pages 425-450
1.Perhaps it’s good that the pregnancy lasts 10
months, because it gives us some time to get ready
for the arrival of this new family member.
2.Keep in mind that your perseverance and patience are soon
about to pay off.
3.Fatigue is your body’s way of telling you to slow down.
4.To help you prepare, and stay calm: Educate yourself.
Knowing what’s going to happen to your body when you
give birth will make you less tense and fearful as it actually
takes place.
Chapter 14 | Quotes From Pages 451-477
1.I think nature’s way of making us look forward to
labor is to make the final month extremely
uncomfortable.
2.Try to be patient, although with all the work you’ve done,
that may not be easy.
3.If you’re frightened and anxious during labor, you’ll have a
more difficult labor.
4.Your own baby may be smaller or larger and still be normal
and healthy.
5.Your pregnancy is almost over.
Chapter 15 | Quotes From Pages 478-531
1.Control what you can — but be ready to let go of
what you can’t control.
2.Try to relax. Women’s bodies are made to accommodate
labor and delivery. Labor, as the name implies, is work;
that’s true. But you can help make the experience go as
smoothly as possible by trying to relax.
3.Don’t worry if you feel overwhelmed or unsure — it’s
normal. It’s a big job, and it’s okay to feel a mix of
emotions.
4.Savor this moment, cherish it and embrace the joy that
nothing else in life can quite match.

Chapter 16 | Quotes From Pages 532-561
1.If you’re feeling anxious about a scheduled repeat
cesarean birth, discuss your fears with your care
provider, childbirth educator or partner.
2.Almost all mothers and babies recover well after a
C-section, with few problems. Although you would
probably have preferred a vaginal birth, remind yourself
that your health and the health of your baby are much more
important than is the method of delivery.
3.If you’ve had a previous C-section, you may need to have
one again. But this isn’t always the case.
4.Stay flexible. Sometimes the second baby changes position
or has heart rate problems after the first baby is born.
5.It’s important to remember that any childbirth carries risks
for both the mother and the baby.
Chapter 17 | Quotes From Pages 564-611
1.Your time in the hospital is also an opportunity to
ask questions — you’ll likely have many!
2.Take advantage of their expertise.
3.Your body has been through a significant workout.
4.Once you get home, spare moments may be few and far
between.
5.Your newborn will first appear somewhat messy looking.
6.A rounded swelling of the scalp is usually seen on the top
and back of the baby’s head when a baby is born the usual
way — headfirst.
Chapter 18 | Quotes From Pages 612-657
1.No matter how many pregnancy and baby care
books you’ve read or how meticulous you’ve been
in getting everything in place, nothing can fully
prepare you for the first few weeks after your
baby’s birth.
2.Be patient with yourself and your baby. You’ll get there in
your own way and in your own time.
3.During the first few weeks of a newborn’s life, it may seem
like all he or she does is eat, sleep, cry and keep you busy
changing diapers.
4.Crying is the first and primary form of communication that
newborns use. And they do plenty of it — young babies
typically cry on average from one to four hours a day.
5.You’ll soon become a pro at everything from changing
diapers to giving your little one a bath.
6.It’s common to feel frustrated, angry, tense, irritable,
worried and fatigued.
7.If your baby was born with a birth defect, spits up often
after eating, or has a breathing, lung or heart problem, talk
to your baby’s care provider about the best sleeping
position for your child.
8.If something is wrong, don’t hesitate to reach out for
supportive resources.

Chapter 19 | Quotes From Pages 658-691
1.With a healthy lifestyle, it will! But it does take
time to recover from the changes that occurred
over the previous 10 months.
2.It’s not unrealistic to expect to bounce back quickly after
giving birth, but over time you will start to feel better
physically and get back in shape.
3.Breast self-examination can be more difficult during
pregnancy and breast-feeding, but being observant of your
breast appearance and consistency is still important.
4.Keep in mind that your feelings are very normal. Up to 80
percent of women feel mood changes in the first two weeks
after birth.
5.Your feelings will become stronger with time. Give it time.
Chapter 20 | Quotes From Pages 692-727
1.Rest assured that feeling anxious or nervous about
your new responsibilities is completely normal.
2.Early survival tips Don’t be surprised if the first few
weeks, or even months, with your newborn are full of
chaos.
3.It’s OK to accept help, too.
4.Successful parenting takes practice, which means making
mistakes and moving on to the next strategy.
5.Make sleep a priority. Lack of sleep is cumulative, and
constant fatigue can be a trigger for depression and anxiety.
6.Maintain a sense of humor. Babies can make you do things
you’ve never dreamed of before, like cleaning poop off
your hands.
7.Try to be more tolerant of yourself and of your partner. No
parent is perfect, and no new parent is going to get
everything right on day one.
8.Recognizing that the road ahead might be a bit bumpy
seemed to better prepare them for the transition to
parenthood.
9.If you’re overwhelmed, eliminate activities that aren’t
absolutely necessary.
10.But most of all, listen to yourself and your child.
Chapter 21 | Quotes From Pages 730-754
1.Genetic screening tests offer expectant and new
parents an opportunity to explore whether their
child may be at risk of a genetic disorder.
2.Most babies are born healthy without genetic problems.
3.The decision to pursue genetic screening is a personal one.
4.If you have a family member who’s experienced a high
number of miscarriages, mention this to your care provider.
5.Testing for autosomal recessive diseases may be done for
specific ethnic groups in which certain recessive diseases
are more common or if there’s a family history of an
autosomal recessive disease.
6.A genetic counselor can talk you through the types of
conditions being screened and also discuss the limitations
of the screening.

Chapter 22 | Quotes From Pages 755-804
1.It may reassure you to know that most
pregnancies — more than 95 percent — are
healthy and result in the safe delivery of a healthy
baby.
2.Whatever the reason, certain tests can help determine the
health of your baby while he or she is still in your womb.
3.It’s worthwhile to know about screening options so that
you can make informed decisions about them.
4.The majority of women will have a healthy baby.
5.If a test indicates that your baby may have a birth defect or
another health condition, how will you handle it?
Chapter 23 | Quotes From Pages 805-847
1.Breast milk is best, and the benefits of
breast-feeding are well-established.
2.Feeding your baby formula instead of breast milk shouldn’t
lead to feelings of guilt.
3.Throughout this adjustment, remember that feeding your
newborn is about more than just nourishment.
4.Breast milk provides babies with: Ideal nutrition.
5.Breast-feeding can promote intimacy and closeness
between mom and baby.
6.It’s a natural process, but that doesn’t mean it comes easily
to everyone.
7.If your baby is to thrive, he or she needs a healthy mother.
8.Sometimes breast-feeding isn’t possible.
9.Seek help if you need it.
Chapter 24 | Quotes From Pages 848-861
1.No two women have the same tolerance for pain.
No two labors are exactly the same, either.
2.Ultimately, you need to choose what’s right for you.
3.Labors often don’t go according to plan.
4.You won’t have failed if you ask for pain medication.
5.Education itself may be a form of pain relief.

Chapter 25 | Quotes From Pages 862-876
1.Educate yourself about the risks and benefits of
both ways of delivery, and discuss the pros and
cons with your health care team — but don’t let
fear be the deciding factor.
2.Some women fear that the effort involved in pushing a
baby through the birth canal may cause fecal or urinary
incontinence, damage pelvic muscles, or injure pelvic
nerves.
3.However, it should generally be scheduled for no earlier
than 39 weeks into your pregnancy, to help ensure your
baby’s safety.
4.If you had a previous vaginal delivery that was especially
difficult, remind yourself that no two labors are alike and
that giving birth this time may be a much different
experience.
5.The best way to make a decision is to be as informed as
possible. Ask yourself why this approach is attractive to
you.
Chapter 26 | Quotes From Pages 877-889
1.It used to be that once you had a C-section, all of
your subsequent deliveries would be by cesarean
as well. Today, a vaginal birth after cesarean
(VBAC) is possible for many women.
2.A vaginal birth is generally safer than a C-section, because
it doesn’t involve major surgery.
3.Your labor coach and others also may be able to play a
greater role in a vaginal delivery.
4.Keep your ultimate goal in mind. You want both you and
baby to have a healthy outcome, regardless of how you get
there.
5.Most women who’ve undergone a cesarean delivery are
candidates for a vaginal birth in their subsequent
pregnancies.
Chapter 27 | Quotes From Pages 890-928
1.Choosing a birth control method is a personal
decision that should take into account your
individual health, lifestyle, and family planning
goals.
2.If you're planning another pregnancy in the near future, you
may want a birth control method that’s easy to stop using
and quickly reversible.
3.It’s important to choose a type of birth control that suits
your lifestyle.
4.Breast-feeding can be as effective as condom use for
contraception, for up to six months — but only if all of the
following are true: You’re exclusively breast-feeding.
5.For many new moms, juggling feedings and work
schedules with a partner can make these conditions
unrealistic.

Chapter 28 | Quotes From Pages 929-1325
1.Knowing more about why you’re feeling moody,
and realizing these mood swings are temporary,
can help you weather your moody storms.
2.As your due date nears, you may find yourself cleaning
cupboards, washing walls, organizing your closets... This
powerful urge to clean, organize and decorate before the
baby arrives is called the nesting instinct.
3.Rest. Accept the fact that you need extra rest during these
ten months, and plan your daily life accordingly.
4.Mild shortness of breath is common in pregnancy, but
severe shortness of breath, especially if it’s accompanied
by chest pain, may indicate a more serious problem.
5.Many women have increased vaginal discharge throughout
pregnancy. This discharge, called leukorrhea, is thin, white,
and mild smelling or odorless.
Chapter 29 | Quotes From Pages 1328-1406
1.Many problems that develop during pregnancy
can be successfully managed.
2.Listen to your care provider’s advice and ask questions
until you feel that you fully understand the complication
and how best to treat it.
3.If anemia is suspected, steps can be taken to prevent harm
to the baby.
4.Depression is a common mood disorder that is serious but
treatable.
5.If you think you may be depressed, talk with your care
provider about it.
6.Gestational diabetes usually resolves after delivery.
7.The only cure for preeclampsia and other hypertensive
problems in pregnancy is delivery.
Chapter 30 | Quotes From Pages 1407-1433
1.If something does go wrong, trust that your care
provider and your health care team will do the
best for both you and your baby.
2.When complications arise and things don’t go as planned,
it’s easy to feel out of control, but be as flexible as you can
and try not to panic.
3.Ask as many questions as you need to in order to feel
comfortable with the plan of care.
4.Induction may allow you to be more prepared, mentally
and physically, when you go to the hospital.
5.Whatever the cause, if your cervix is still fairly closed
when you arrive at the hospital or birthing center and your
contractions aren’t very strong, your care provider may
suggest some options to promote labor.
6.Your care provider will evaluate how far down the birth
canal the baby has descended and if the problem can be
corrected by readjusting the baby’s head position.
7.In extreme situations, low oxygen levels can be
life-threatening. Your care provider is trained to identify
the signs of severe distress and take immediate action,
which generally involves emergency cesarean delivery.

Chapter 31 | Quotes From Pages 1434-1482
1.The good news is, with a doctor’s help and
guidance, most problems can be managed in a way
that’s safe for both you and your baby.
2.If your asthma is well-controlled during pregnancy, there’s
little chance you and your baby will have an increased risk
of health complications.
3.The prognosis generally is the same as that of women with
breast cancer who aren’t pregnant. However, it’s important
that treatment begins right away.
4.If you don’t take proper care of depression during
pregnancy, you may put your health — and your baby’s
health — at risk.
5.If you have IBD, pregnancy shouldn’t significantly affect
your treatment. Most of the medications commonly used to
treat IBD don’t harm the fetus.
6.With proper care and support, most women experiencing
postpartum depression are able to recover and lead
fulfilling lives.
7.It’s very important that you seek professional care.
8.If your platelet count is very low, medications may be
given to try and raise your platelet count before your baby
is born.
Chapter 32 | Quotes From Pages 1483-1532
1.Most often, the cause of recurrent miscarriage is
not identified. Don’t give up hope. Even if you’ve
had repeated miscarriages, you still have a good
chance of a successful future pregnancy.
2.Emotional healing may take much longer than physical
healing. Miscarriage can be a heart-wrenching loss that
others around you may not fully understand.
3.Grieving is the process of letting go of the emotional
attachment you’ve developed. Stages of grief ... have no
timetable.
4.Talk to your care provider if you’re feeling profound
sadness or depression. Most women who’ve had a
miscarriage go on to have successful pregnancies.
5.Say goodbye to the baby. Grieving is a vital step in
accepting and recovering from your loss.

Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick Questions
View on Bookey Website
Chapter 1 | Preparing to become pregnant| Q&A
1.Question
Why is it important to think ahead before having a baby?
Answer:Thinking ahead can help set you and your
baby up for the best possible beginning. It allows
you to prepare emotionally, financially, and
physically for the changes that parenthood will
bring, making the transition to pregnancy smoother.
2.Question
What key questions should I consider when determining
if the time is right to have a baby?
Answer:Consider why you want to have a baby, whether
your partner shares your feelings and beliefs about parenting,
how a baby will impact your lifestyle and career, and if
you’re emotionally and financially ready for this
responsibility.
3.Question
How can I prepare my body for pregnancy?
Answer:Make a preconception appointment with your care
provider to assess your health, discuss chronic conditions,
and receive advice on health practices. Start taking prenatal
vitamins to ensure you're getting essential nutrients before
conception.
4.Question
What is the significance of taking prenatal vitamins
before conception?
Answer:Prenatal vitamins are crucial as they provide
necessary nutrients like folic acid that help prevent neural
tube defects. This proactive step supports early fetal
development which occurs even before you may know you're
pregnant.
5.Question
What lifestyle changes can maximize my fertility?
Answer:Maintain a healthy weight, stay physically active, eat
a nutritious diet, limit caffeine and manage stress. Regular
sexual intercourse around ovulation is also key to improving
your chances of conception.
6.Question
What are some early signs of pregnancy to look for?
Answer:Common early signs include breast tenderness,
fatigue, slight bleeding or cramping, nausea, increased
urination, food aversions or cravings, headaches, and mood
swings. Missing your period is also a significant indicator.
7.Question
How can tracking my cycle help in conception?
Answer:By tracking your menstrual cycle, you can better
predict your ovulation window, which increases your
chances of conception if you have sex during those fertile
days.
8.Question
What should I do if I suspect I'm pregnant?
Answer:Take a home pregnancy test to confirm. If the test is
positive, contact your care provider for further guidance and
to schedule your first prenatal appointment.
9.Question
What factors should I consider when choosing a care
provider for pregnancy?
Answer:Consider the provider's qualifications, proximity to
your home or work, their availability for questions, the
birthing location, and whether they align with your personal
birthing preferences and needs.
10.Question
How does age affect fertility and pregnancy?
Answer:As women age, particularly after 35, fertility can
decline, leading to longer times to conceive and higher risks
for pregnancy complications, including gestational diabetes,
chromosomal abnormalities, and miscarriage.
11.Question
What steps can older women take to ensure a healthy
pregnancy?
Answer:Seek regular care, maintain a healthy lifestyle, avoid
harmful substances, and stay informed about prenatal testing
options to minimize risks associated with pregnancy at an
older age.
12.Question
Why is it crucial to have regular medical check-ups while
planning for a baby?
Answer:Regular check-ups help ensure your health is
optimized for pregnancy, manage any underlying conditions,
and equip you with the necessary information for a healthy
pregnancy journey.
Chapter 2 | Healthy choices during pregnancy| Q&A
1.Question
What are some healthy lifestyle changes I can make
during pregnancy?
Answer:During pregnancy, it's crucial to eat well,
exercise regularly, and minimize risky habits. Start
by incorporating more fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, and lean proteins into your diet. Stay active
with exercises like walking, swimming, or prenatal
yoga, and aim for at least 30 minutes of activity each
day. Make it a family affair — your healthy habits
can inspire your partner and children to adopt
better lifestyles too!
2.Question
Why is nutrition so important during pregnancy?
Answer:Nutrition during pregnancy lays the groundwork for
your baby's health. Eating well ensures your body gets the
essential vitamins and minerals needed for fetal
development, including iron, calcium, and folic acid. A
balanced diet supports your health too, helping mitigate
common pregnancy ailments like fatigue and nausea,
providing you with the energy to care for your new baby.
3.Question
How much should I be eating during pregnancy,
especially in the first trimester?
Answer:In the first trimester, you won't need significantly
more calories but should focus on the quality of your food.
Aim for a variety of nutritious foods over the course of the
day. It’s more about eating 'for two' in terms of nutrition
rather than quantity — making every bite healthy and
nourishing.
4.Question
What foods should I avoid during pregnancy?
Answer:It's best to avoid seafood high in mercury,
undercooked meats and eggs, processed meats, unpasteurized
dairy, and unwashed produce. These foods can carry risks of
foodborne illness, which can be particularly dangerous
during pregnancy. Always ensure your food is properly
cooked and handled to protect both your health and your
baby's.
5.Question
Why is it important to stay active during pregnancy?
Answer:Staying active during pregnancy can help manage
common complaints like back pain, boost energy levels,
reduce the risk of gestational diabetes, and improve your
overall mood. Regular exercise prepares your body for the
demands of childbirth and can even contribute to quicker
recovery post-delivery.
6.Question
What role do prenatal vitamins play during pregnancy?
Answer:Prenatal vitamins are designed to fill nutritional gaps
and support both your health and your baby's development.
Key nutrients, particularly folic acid and iron, are vital in
preventing birth defects and supporting increased blood
volume. However, vitamins should complement a
well-rounded diet, not replace it.
7.Question
How can I manage weight gain during pregnancy?
Answer:Weight gain during pregnancy is expected, but it’s
essential to keep it within healthy limits. Focus on balanced
nutrition and regular exercise. If you're unsure about how
much weight is appropriate for you, consult your healthcare
provider to develop a tailored plan based on your
pre-pregnancy weight and health.
8.Question
How do I best prepare for my travel while pregnant?
Answer:Traveling during pregnancy can be safe and
enjoyable, especially in the second trimester when morning
sickness usually subsides. Ensure you understand your travel
limits, plan for regular breaks, and stay hydrated. Check with
your obstetrician about any specific travel concerns related to
your health or pregnancy complications.
9.Question
What tips can you offer for getting through morning
sickness?
Answer:To manage morning sickness, consider eating small,
frequent meals, focusing on bland foods, and staying
hydrated. Ginger tea and crackers can also help settle your
stomach. Avoid letting yourself get too hungry, as this can
exacerbate nausea.
10.Question
How can I ensure I'm getting enough calcium during
pregnancy if I'm lactose intolerant?
Answer:If you’re lactose intolerant, there are several ways to
get enough calcium. Consider lactose-free dairy products,
fortified foods like orange juice and cereal, and non-dairy
sources such as leafy green vegetables, sardines with bones,
and certain beans. You may also want to discuss calcium
supplements with your healthcare provider.
11.Question
What do I do if I fall while pregnant?
Answer:If you fall during pregnancy, the protective
structures around your baby usually keep them safe.
However, you should monitor for any unusual symptoms
such as pain, bleeding, or decreased fetal movement. Consult
your healthcare provider to ensure everything is alright.
12.Question
Is it safe to exercise during pregnancy?
Answer:Yes, exercising during pregnancy is generally safe
and beneficial. Regular activity can help with physical
fitness, labor preparation, and emotional well-being. Always
consult your healthcare provider about which exercises are
appropriate for your specific situation.
Chapter 3 | For dads and partners| Q&A
1.Question
How can dads and partners actively participate in their
partner’s pregnancy from the start?
Answer:Dads and partners can actively participate
by getting the pregnancy testing kit, attending
prenatal visits, discussing emotions and experiences
with their partner, talking to and bonding with the
baby, taking childbirth classes together, and
engaging in a healthy lifestyle with their partner.
2.Question
What roles do hormonal changes play in expectant
fathers during their partner's pregnancy?
Answer:Hormonal changes in expectant fathers, such as
increases in prolactin and cortisol and decreases in
testosterone, enhance paternal instincts, help with bonding,
and can lead to sympathy pains similar to what the pregnant
partner experiences.
3.Question
What specific challenges might partners face during the
first trimester of pregnancy?
Answer:During the first trimester, partners may notice their
pregnant partner experiencing constant nausea, extreme
tiredness, mood swings, and food aversions. It's essential for
them to understand that these changes are due to hormonal
transformations occurring in their partner's body.
4.Question
How should partners manage communication and
intimacy during pregnancy?
Answer:Partners should maintain open communication about
expectations, feelings, and experiences related to the
pregnancy. For intimacy, they can explore different forms of
affection when sexual activity is less frequent, such as
cuddling or massage, to stay connected.
5.Question
What preparations should partners make as the due date
approaches?
Answer:Partners should educate themselves about childbirth,
map their route to the hospital, install an infant car seat, keep
a copy of the birth plan, pack necessary bags, and manage
communications effectively during and after labor.
6.Question
What are some common anxieties that new parents may
experience?
Answer:New parents might worry about limited paternity
leave, increased responsibilities with a newborn, disrupted
sleep, less time with their partner, financial strains, and the
possibility of experiencing postpartum depression.
7.Question
How can new parents ease their anxieties and transition
smoothly into parenthood?
Answer:By keeping communication open, building support
networks, preparing financially, and being proactive in their
involvement and roles as parents, they can alleviate anxieties
and adjust to the new responsibilities of parenting.
8.Question
How can partners stay involved after the baby is born?
Answer:Partners can stay involved by spending times at the
hospital with their partner and newborn, sharing
responsibilities like diaper changing and feeding, playing
with the baby, and maintaining emotional intimacy with their
partner through affection and communication.
9.Question
What advice is given regarding sexual activity during
pregnancy?
Answer:Sex is generally safe during pregnancy as long as the
pregnancy is normal and both partners are comfortable.
Partners might need to adjust sexual positions and be
considerate of each other's feelings and physical discomfort.
10.Question
What key message should partners take away regarding
their role in the pregnancy journey?
Answer:Partners should remember that they play a crucial
role in supporting their pregnant partner, preparing for the
arrival of their baby, and maintaining their relationship
throughout the ups and downs of pregnancy and parenthood.

Chapter 4 | PART 2: Pregnancy month by month|
Q&A
1.Question
Why is pregnancy often described as lasting 10 months
instead of 9?
Answer:Pregnancy is typically counted as 40 weeks,
which is divided into 10 calendar months of
approximately 4 weeks each. However, since most
months are slightly longer than 4 weeks, this
sometimes leads to confusion, as a 'month' could
refer to weeks 9 to 12 during the 'third month' of
pregnancy. Therefore, healthcare providers prefer
tracking pregnancy in weeks for precision regarding
the baby’s growth and the timing of essential tests.
2.Question
What should I do if I experience vaginal bleeding or
unusual discharge during pregnancy?
Answer:If you experience any vaginal bleeding or spotting
that persists for more than a day, you should contact your
healthcare provider immediately during the later months of
pregnancy (4-10). For lighter spotting that resolves quickly, a
follow-up within 24 hours is advisable, especially in the early
months.
3.Question
When should I contact my care provider about headaches
during pregnancy?
Answer:Occasional mild headaches can wait until your next
visit. However, if you experience a persistent moderate
headache or a severe headache with dizziness, fainting,
nausea, or visual disturbances, you should contact your care
provider immediately.
4.Question
What signs indicate that I should seek immediate medical
attention during pregnancy?
Answer:You should seek immediate medical attention for
severe bleeding, severe pelvic pain, any degree of pelvic pain
that lasts more than 4 hours, contractions exceeding six per
hour over 2 hours, vomiting accompanied by pain, fever of
102°F or higher, and severe shortness of breath.
5.Question
What are the guidelines for reporting constipation during
pregnancy?
Answer:Mild constipation can be addressed at your next
visit. However, if you experience severe constipation with no
bowel movement for three days, you should contact your
healthcare provider the same day.
6.Question
How can I manage my emotional well-being during
pregnancy, and when is it a concern?
Answer:Experiencing fluctuating moods is common, but if
you find yourself consistently low, losing pleasure in
activities, or having thoughts of self-harm, contact your care
provider immediately. This is crucial to ensure both your and
your baby's mental health.
7.Question
What precautions should I take if I notice swelling or
weight gain?
Answer:Sudden swelling in the hands, face, or feet should be
reported to your care provider the same day, as it could
signal complications. Similarly, if you experience sudden
weight gain, it’s essential to contact your provider promptly.
8.Question
How should I handle fatigue or shortness of breath
during pregnancy?
Answer:If fatigue, weakness, or shortness of breath occurs
occasionally, plan to discuss it at your next appointment.
However, if these symptoms are persistent or severe, you
should contact your care provider the same day.
9.Question
Why is it important to monitor any cravings for non-food
substances during pregnancy?
Answer:Cravings for non-food substances, like clay or dirt,
known as pica, can indicate nutritional deficiencies or
psychological issues. You should discuss these cravings with
your healthcare provider at your next visit to ensure you and
your baby’s health are prioritized.
10.Question
What is the significance of tracking symptoms in relation
to test timing during pregnancy?
Answer:Timely monitoring of your symptoms ensures that
essential tests can be conducted within the appropriate
windows for effective assessment of fetal health. This
attention to detail helps in identifying any issues early and
managing them effectively, enhancing overall pregnancy
outcomes.
Chapter 5 | Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4| Q&A
1.Question
What are the first signs that indicate a person might be
pregnant?
Answer:A missed menstrual period, slight spotting
(implantation bleeding), and home pregnancy tests
showing positive results are common initial signs of
pregnancy.
2.Question
How is pregnancy calculated starting from the last
menstrual period?
Answer:Pregnancy is calculated from the first day of the last
menstrual period, even though conception occurs about two
weeks later.
3.Question
What process occurs immediately after fertilization?
Answer:The fertilized egg, now called a zygote, begins to
divide into two cells approximately 12 hours after
fertilization, continuing to split and multiply as it moves
through the fallopian tube.
4.Question
What hormone is crucial for maintaining a pregnancy
and where is it produced?
Answer:Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) is crucial for
maintaining pregnancy and is produced by the cells of the
developing placenta shortly after fertilization.
5.Question
What emotional changes can a pregnant person expect
during the first month?
Answer:Mood swings and mixed feelings about pregnancy
are common, influenced by hormonal changes, fatigue, and
the stresses of impending parenthood.
6.Question
What are the three layers formed in the developing
embryo, and what do they develop into?
Answer:The ectoderm develops into the nervous system
(including the brain and spinal cord), the mesoderm forms
the heart and circulatory system, and the endoderm becomes
the inner lining of organs such as the lungs and intestines.
7.Question
During weeks 1-4 of pregnancy, what significant changes
occur in a person’s body?
Answer:The body experiences increased blood volume,
tenderness and changes in the breasts, and thickening of the
uterine lining to support the growing baby.
8.Question
Can parents choose the sex of their baby, and what
determines it?
Answer:Parents cannot choose the sex of their baby in most
circumstances; it is genetically determined at fertilization by
the sex chromosomes contributed by the sperm, with X
representing female and Y representing male.
9.Question
What steps should someone take after confirming their
pregnancy with a home test?
Answer:They should schedule a prenatal checkup with a
chosen healthcare provider to assess overall health, identify
risk factors, and establish a prenatal care plan.
10.Question
What lifestyle changes are recommended in preparation
for pregnancy?
Answer:Adopting a healthy lifestyle includes not smoking,
avoiding alcohol and drugs, and taking a daily vitamin
supplement with folic acid to reduce the risk of neural tube
defects.
Chapter 6 | Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8| Q&A
1.Question
What is the miracle happening during the early stages of
pregnancy?
Answer:During the early stages of pregnancy,
specifically from weeks five to eight, the embryo
goes through a miraculous transformation. It starts
from a single-celled zygote and rapidly develops into
a complex organism, forming essential structures
such as the heart, brain, and limbs. This process is
known as differentiation, where cells specialize to
create all the necessary organs and systems, which
feels like a true miracle inside the mother’s body.
2.Question
How can stress affect pregnancy, particularly concerning
miscarriage?
Answer:It's natural to worry about stress and its potential
impact on pregnancy. However, research indicates that stress
does not directly cause miscarriage. Miscarriages are more
commonly linked to chromosomal abnormalities in the
embryo or various medical conditions. Therefore, it's
important to focus on self-care and avoid known risks rather
than stressing over every aspect of life.
3.Question
What major developments occur in the baby from week
five to week eight of pregnancy?
Answer:Between weeks five and eight, significant
developments occur in the embryo. By week five, the embryo
forms the neural tube, which will develop into the brain and
spinal cord. By week six, facial features begin to take shape,
and the heart starts pumping blood. In week seven, the
umbilical cord forms, connecting the embryo to the placenta,
and by week eight, fingers and toes start to appear, and the
heart rate becomes more defined. Overall, this period marks
the foundation of the baby’s anatomy.
4.Question
What are some essential precautions to take during the
critical period of weeks five to ten of pregnancy?
Answer:During weeks five to ten, the embryo is particularly
vulnerable, so it's crucial to avoid teratogens such as alcohol,
certain medications, and recreational drugs, as they can lead
to birth defects. Additionally, be cautious about infections
since some can harm the embryo without the mother even
feeling ill. Maintaining a balanced diet and taking prenatal
vitamins, especially folic acid, is vital to support healthy cell
development.
5.Question
What emotional changes can a pregnant person expect
during the second month?
Answer:In the second month of pregnancy, many experience
a rollercoaster of emotions. Anticipation and excitement
about becoming a parent blend with fears and worries
regarding the pregnancy. This psychological journey can
manifest as anxiety over what could harm the baby or how to
manage new responsibilities. It's essential to communicate
these feelings with a partner or seek support from healthcare
providers.
6.Question
What should be discussed during the first prenatal visit?
Answer:During the first prenatal visit, expect comprehensive
discussions about your medical history, lifestyle habits, and
any concerns regarding the pregnancy. Key topics to cover
include previous pregnancies, current medications, lifestyle
behaviors like diet and exercise, and any family medical
history that could impact the pregnancy. It’s also an
opportunity to address your questions and clarify any fears.
7.Question
How do hormonal changes affect the body during early
pregnancy?
Answer:Hormonal changes during early pregnancy cause a
range of physical effects. Increased levels of hormones like
estrogen and progesterone lead to symptoms such as fatigue,
nausea (morning sickness), breast tenderness, and increased
blood volume, which can cause dizziness and headaches.
These hormones are essential in supporting the pregnancy
and developing the embryo but can also lead to discomfort as
the body adapts.
8.Question
What is coping with morning sickness like, and what are
some strategies to manage it?
Answer:Coping with morning sickness can be challenging,
but many women experience it to varying degrees.
Symptoms often start between weeks five and eight and can
last throughout the first trimester. Strategies for managing
morning sickness include eating small, bland meals, staying
hydrated, and avoiding strong odors. Some women find relief
with ginger products or by adjusting the timing of their
prenatal vitamins.
9.Question
What are the risks and necessities of carrying multiples
during pregnancy?
Answer:Carrying multiples, such as twins or triplets,
increases the likelihood of complications, including preterm
labor, preeclampsia, and the need for a cesarean delivery.
Women expecting multiples should have more frequent
check-ups to monitor their health and the babies' growth.
Proper nutrition and weight management are crucial since the
body's demands will be higher with more than one baby.
10.Question
What emotional support might be beneficial during
pregnancy?
Answer:Emotional support during pregnancy can be
incredibly beneficial. Women should feel encouraged to
discuss their feelings, worries, and concerns with their
partner or trusted friends. This can help alleviate anxiety and
help foster a closer bond. Seeking support from prenatal
classes, counseling, or even support groups specifically for
new mothers can also provide comfort during this transitional
period.

Chapter 7 | Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12| Q&A
1.Question
What emotional changes can women expect during the
early months of pregnancy?
Answer:Women often experience a whirlwind of
emotions as they adapt to their pregnancy. During
the first trimester, feelings of joy and excitement
about the pregnancy may be mingled with worries
about body image, especially as their bodies change
and grow to support the baby. Some women may
feel overwhelmed by the physical discomforts and
hormonal fluctuations that can cause mood swings
and a wave of sensitivity, while others may feel a
sense of purpose and gratitude as they embrace the
journey of motherhood.
2.Question
How does the baby's growth change from week 9 to week
12 of pregnancy?
Answer:By week 9, the baby starts resembling a human,
developing distinct facial features, hands, and feet. By week
10, all vital organs are formed, and the skeletal system begins
to develop. Moving into week 11, the baby's growth
accelerates as it is officially classified as a fetus, tripling in
size by week 20. Finally, by week 12, the baby’s face
becomes more defined, and it measures about 3 inches in
length, marking the end of the first trimester.
3.Question
What are some common physical changes that occur in a
woman's body during the first trimester?
Answer:During the first trimester, women may experience
nausea, breast tenderness, increased fatigue, and frequent
urination. Hormonal changes lead to weight gain, which
usually ranges from 1 to 4 pounds by the end of week 12, and
visible changes in the breasts as they prepare for
breastfeeding. Additionally, fluid retention can cause some
women to experience slightly blurred vision.
4.Question
How can women cope with body image issues during
pregnancy?
Answer:Women can cope with body image concerns by
focusing on the positive aspects of their changes and
recognizing that their bodies are doing important work in
nurturing a new life. Surrounding themselves with supportive
friends and family, engaging in positive self-talk, and
embracing the changes as part of the beautiful journey of
motherhood can help alleviate feelings of dissatisfaction. It’s
also beneficial to communicate openly with partners about
feelings and concerns.
5.Question
What is 'centering pregnancy' and how can it benefit
expectant mothers?
Answer:Centering pregnancy is an innovative approach to
prenatal care where expectant mothers meet in groups to
share experiences and support each other during their
pregnancy journey. This model offers individual time with
healthcare providers while also encouraging collective
learning and emotional support, fostering a sense of
community among participants. The shared experiences and
companionship can significantly reduce feelings of isolation
and enhance the overall prenatal experience.
6.Question
What should women know about sex during pregnancy?
Answer:As long as the pregnancy is normal, women can
engage in sexual activity. It’s common for sex drive to
fluctuate throughout pregnancy, often influenced by physical
discomfort and emotional state. Partners should be adaptive
and communicative about comfort levels, exploring what
positions work best during different stages of pregnancy.
However, it's crucial to seek medical advice if any
concerning symptoms arise, such as bleeding or risk of
preterm labor.
7.Question
What discussions should take place during prenatal
checkups regarding testing?
Answer:Prenatal checkups are an essential time to discuss the
necessity of prenatal testing. Women should talk with their
healthcare providers about recommended tests, their
purposes, and the potential results. It’s important to weigh
the pros and cons of optional tests and understand what their
insurance covers. Open communication will help women feel
informed and comfortable with decisions about screening for
fetal abnormalities.
Chapter 8 | Month 4: Weeks 13 to 16| Q&A
1.Question
What feelings are common during the second trimester of
pregnancy?
Answer:Many women experience relief and
increased energy levels as they move past the nausea
and fatigue of the first trimester. They often feel
more comfortable with sharing their pregnancy
news.
2.Question
What significant developments occur for the baby during
weeks 13 to 16?
Answer:During these weeks, the baby begins developing
essential features such as recognizable eyes, ears, and the
ability to make movements. By week 16, the baby's skeletal
system is forming, muscles are developing, and hormonal
activities begin.
3.Question
What are some common physical changes a pregnant
woman may experience during the second trimester?
Answer:Common changes include nasal congestion,
increased blood volume leading to lower blood pressure,
increased respiratory rate, and potential weight gain of about
2 to 3 pounds. Women may also notice changing breast size
and skin pigmentation.
4.Question
How can a pregnant woman manage discomforts like
heartburn and constipation?
Answer:To manage these discomforts, she can focus on a
nutritious diet, stay hydrated, eat smaller meals, and engage
in gentle physical activity as tolerated to promote digestion.
5.Question
What advice is given for clothing choices during
pregnancy?
Answer:Invest in a few well-fitting maternity clothes that
cater to your growing belly, but avoid buying too many at
once as your size will continue to change. Consider
consignment shops or borrowing from friends.
6.Question
What emotional changes might a pregnant woman
encounter during this time?
Answer:With increased energy and a visible baby bump,
many women feel reminiscent and more connected to their
babies, prompting them to take care of pregnancy-related
tasks they might have previously deferred.
7.Question
What should expectant parents consider when choosing
child care options?
Answer:When selecting child care, parents should consider
budget, personal values regarding care, family dynamics, and
the potential impact on their child's emotional health and
development. Exploring options early is crucial.
8.Question
How can balancing work and family impact a parent's
feelings and the child's well-being?
Answer:Positive feelings about work and home life can
create a beneficial environment for the child. Conversely,
dissatisfaction in balancing both roles may negatively
influence the parent-child relationship.
9.Question
What is the importance of prenatal checkups during this
stage of pregnancy?
Answer:Prenatal checkups are critical for monitoring the
baby's growth, confirming due dates, and managing any
health concerns that may arise, ensuring both mother and
baby's well-being.
10.Question
What is one way a pregnant woman can support her
posture as her body changes?
Answer:Exercises like the back press can help strengthen
core muscles, which support better posture as the body
adjusts to the growing baby.
Chapter 9 | Month 5: Weeks 17 to 20| Q&A
1.Question
What does feeling my baby move for the first time
signify?
Answer:Feeling your baby move for the first time is
a joyful and reassuring moment during pregnancy.
It indicates that your baby is active and healthy
inside the womb, marking the beginning of a more
interactive experience between you and your child.
The movements can often be described as gentle
sensations, like light tickles, which provide comfort
knowing that all is well.
2.Question
What physical changes can I expect in my body during
the fifth month of pregnancy?
Answer:During the fifth month, your uterus expands to your
navel, making your pregnancy visibly noticeable. You may
experience growth in your breasts, increased blood volume
affecting circulation, and some common discomforts such as
back pain and shortness of breath. These changes are all part
of your body adjusting to support your growing baby.
3.Question
How does my baby develop during the fifth month?
Answer:In the fifth month, your baby undergoes significant
growth and development. They start to fill out and become
more baby-like, with fully formed limbs and features. Bone
ossification begins, the baby can hear sounds for the first
time, and they start swallowing amniotic fluid, aiding in gut
and lung development.
4.Question
What is vernix caseosa, and why is it important for my
baby?
Answer:Vernix caseosa is a white, fatty coating that covers
your baby's skin during development. This protective layer
prevents the delicate skin from chapping or scratching and
plays a crucial role in maintaining skin health before birth. It
is a sign of ongoing growth and development as your baby
prepares for the outside world.
5.Question
Should I be concerned about experiencing memory
changes during pregnancy?
Answer:While some women report memory changes during
pregnancy, often termed 'baby brain', the evidence supporting
significant cognitive decline is inconclusive. Researchers
suggest that these changes may be due to sleep deprivation,
hormonal shifts, or the emotional stresses of adjusting to
motherhood. It's important to focus on the positive aspects of
this transition rather than worry about potential cognitive
slips.
6.Question
What should I expect during my prenatal checkup in the
fifth month?
Answer:During your fifth-month prenatal checkup, your
healthcare provider will track your and your baby's health,
checking your weight, blood pressure, and measuring your
fundal height. If your appointment is between 18 to 20
weeks, you may also undergo an ultrasound, which is not
only a chance to evaluate your baby's anatomy and heart rate
but possibly to determine the baby's sex if you're interested.
7.Question
How can I support my baby's development while
pregnant?
Answer:To support your baby’s development, it’s essential to
maintain a balanced diet rich in nutrients, ensure you're
getting enough iron to prevent anemia, stay hydrated, and
engage in safe physical activity. Regular prenatal checkups
and open communication with your healthcare provider about
your experiences and any concerns also contribute to a
healthier pregnancy.
8.Question
Is it normal to experience aches and pains during
pregnancy?
Answer:Yes, experiencing aches and pains during pregnancy
is quite normal due to various bodily changes as your body
adjusts to accommodate a growing baby. Common sources of
discomfort include back pain, groin cramps from stretching
ligaments, and changes in posture and balance. If pain
becomes severe or persistent, it’s advisable to check with
your healthcare provider.
9.Question
How can I bond with my baby while they are in the
womb?
Answer:You can bond with your baby while they are in the
womb by talking, singing, or playing gentle music. As your
baby's hearing develops, they can start to recognize the
sounds of your voice and familiar tunes, creating an early
connection between parent and child.

Chapter 10 | Month 6: Weeks 21 to 24| Q&A
1.Question
What physical changes might I expect during weeks 21-24
of pregnancy?
Answer:During weeks 21-24, you may notice that
your baby bump is more prominent, signaling
visible pregnancy. Your baby is growing rapidly,
passing the 1-pound mark and developing its
digestive system and senses. Physically, your heart
may experience lower blood pressure and your body
will make more blood, potentially causing nasal
congestion or bleeding gums. Your breasts may
begin to produce colostrum, and routine prenatal
visits will check your uterine growth, weight, and
baby's heart rate.
2.Question
How does my baby's development progress during the
second trimester?
Answer:By week 24, your baby's lungs are developing
rapidly, practicing breathing movements, and starting to
produce surfactant, crucial for breathing air after birth. The
baby's reproductive system is also developing, and they are
gaining sensory abilities such as taste and touch. If born
prematurely, by this stage (24 weeks), the baby has a
significant chance of survival, although complications are
common.
3.Question
What are Braxton Hicks contractions and how can I
distinguish them from true labor?
Answer:Braxton Hicks contractions are false labor
contractions that are irregular and generally painless, often
stopping with movement or rest. True labor contractions
become regular, longer, and stronger, continuing regardless
of your activity. The cervix does not change with Braxton
Hicks contractions, while true labor begins to dilate and
efface the cervix.
4.Question
What emotional changes can I expect in my second
trimester?
Answer:During the second trimester, many women
experience improved mood stability as hormone production
begins to regulate. This period may also bring about new
fears regarding childbirth and parenting, which is normal.
Sharing these fears with your partner and healthcare provider
can help alleviate anxiety and provide support.
5.Question
Why is it important to choose a care provider for my
baby before birth?
Answer:Choosing a care provider for your baby ahead of
time ensures you have a trusted medical resource for any
questions or concerns after your child is born. This
preparation helps first-time parents feel more secure and
ready for their new responsibilities.
6.Question
How can childbirth classes help me prepare for delivery?
Answer:Childbirth classes are beneficial for new parents,
especially if you are nervous about labor and delivery. They
provide information on the birthing process, pain
management options, and what to expect during labor,
helping to build confidence and reduce anxiety.
7.Question
What dietary and exercise recommendations are suitable
during this stage of pregnancy?
Answer:Maintaining a balanced diet and regular exercise
within healthy limits is encouraged. Exercise, like pelvic tilts
to strengthen abdominal muscles, can help mitigate
discomfort and prepare your body for labor.
8.Question
What signs should I watch for concerning urinary tract
infections during pregnancy?
Answer:Be aware of increased susceptibility to urinary tract
infections due to physical changes. Symptoms like urgency,
painful urination, or unusual discharge should prompt a call
to your healthcare provider.
9.Question
What are some ways to cope with fears about childbirth?
Answer:Listing and sharing your fears with your partner and
healthcare provider can empower you to face them. Open
communication about concerns helps reduce their power and
fosters a supportive environment.
Chapter 11 | Month 7: Weeks 25 to 28| Q&A
1.Question
What did you learn about your baby's essential needs
during pregnancy?
Answer:During pregnancy, I learned that a baby’s
essential needs boil down to being comfortable,
well-fed, and most importantly, loved. Material
things like trendy strollers or changing pads may
seem appealing to me as a parent, but they are not
what the baby truly cares about.
2.Question
How does a baby's growth change during the seventh
month of pregnancy?
Answer:In the seventh month, particularly from weeks 25 to
28, the baby undergoes significant growth. They add body
fat, their skin becomes smoother and less wrinkled, they
develop features like eyebrows, eyelashes, and their hands
grow fully developed. By week 28, the baby is around 10
inches long and weighs 2 to 3 pounds.
3.Question
What should I expect in terms of my body changes during
these weeks of pregnancy?
Answer:As your belly grows, your uterus expands
significantly, which can cause heart palpitations and
shortness of breath. You may also experience digestive issues
like heartburn or constipation due to crowding in your
intestines. It’s common to gain about a pound a week during
this stage because of the baby, placenta, and amniotic fluid.
4.Question
How can I cope with emotional stress during the last
months of pregnancy?
Answer:To cope with emotional stress as you approach
delivery, find ways to relax and enjoy this time. Journaling,
playing soothing music, talking to your baby, or taking
photos can all be comforting activities. Also, remember to
slow down and embrace the experience before the demands
of new parenthood take over.
5.Question
What are some significant health checks that occur
during this month of pregnancy?
Answer:This month includes prenatal checkups, where your
provider will check your baby's position in the womb. You
may also undergo a glucose challenge test to screen for
gestational diabetes and, if Rh negative, receive an injection
of Rh immune globulin to prevent complications.
6.Question
What are the physical risks associated with preterm labor
and how can I recognize them?
Answer:Preterm labor can lead to the birth of a low-weight
baby, with risks for health problems. Recognize its signs,
which include uterine contractions, low back pain, pelvic
heaviness, spotting, or unusual discharge. If you notice these
symptoms, it’s crucial to contact your care provider.
7.Question
What is the breast-feeding versus bottle-feeding dilemma
many new mothers face?
Answer:Many mothers struggle with the choice between
breast-feeding and formula feeding. Breast-feeding offers
numerous health benefits, but some women may feel
pressured or anxious about it. It is advisable for mothers to
educate themselves on both options and not to feel guilty
about their choices, as there is no 'one size fits all' approach.
8.Question
How can I prepare for breast-feeding before my baby
arrives?
Answer:Consider taking a prenatal class focused on
breast-feeding. Such classes can prepare you for establishing
milk supply, recognizing hunger cues, and addressing
common issues. If you are unsure, you can plan to give
breast-feeding a try shortly after birth and adjust as needed.
9.Question
What changes might I experience regarding my body
image and personal space during pregnancy?
Answer:During pregnancy, personal boundaries may become
blurred as others feel free to touch your belly or comment on
your appearance. You have the right to protect your personal
space. It's normal to feel sensitive about body image, so
focus on your well-being and how these experiences make
you feel.
Chapter 12 | Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32| Q&A
1.Question
What common physical discomforts might I expect in
month eight of pregnancy?
Answer:In month eight, you may experience leg
cramps, pelvic pressure, increased back pain,
swollen ankles, and hemorrhoids. These discomforts
are common as your baby grows rapidly and takes
up more room in your uterus.
2.Question
Why might I feel a change in my baby's movements
during this stage of pregnancy?
Answer:As the baby grows, space in the uterus becomes
tighter. You may notice a decrease in the sharpness or
intensity of kicks and movements, as the baby may not be
able to move as freely. It’s important to monitor these
movements and contact your care provider if you notice a
significant decrease.
3.Question
How can I tell if my baby is moving less than usual, and
what should I do about it?
Answer:To monitor your baby's movements, sit down and
keep a tally of kicks. If you feel fewer than 10 movements in
two hours, contact your care provider. Remember, while
decreased activity can sometimes indicate a problem, it can
also be normal as the baby settles in for the final weeks of
pregnancy.
4.Question
What changes happen to my body during this stage of
pregnancy?
Answer:During this month, you will experience expansion of
your uterus, changes in hair volume due to hormonal shifts,
increased blood volume causing potential swelling or
varicose veins, and possible shortness of breath as your
diaphragm is pushed upward.
5.Question
What should I consider regarding sleep positions as my
belly grows?
Answer:As your belly grows, sleeping face down or on your
back becomes uncomfortable and is not recommended. It’s
best to sleep on your side, with the left side preferred for
optimal blood flow. Using pillows for support can enhance
comfort.
6.Question
What is cord blood banking, and should I consider it?
Answer:Cord blood banking involves collecting and storing
blood from your baby’s umbilical cord, which is rich in stem
cells. You can choose to donate it to a public bank or store it
privately for personal use. While public donation helps those
in need, private banking can be costly and less likely to
benefit your child in the long run.
7.Question
Why is choosing the right car seat important, and what
are some key features to look for?
Answer:Choosing the right car seat is vital for your baby's
safety. Look for seats that fit your child's weight and height,
can be installed correctly, and have features like a five-point
harness, easy-to-remove covers, and a rear-facing installation
for infants.
8.Question
What safety measures should I take when purchasing a
crib for my newborn?
Answer:Ensure that the crib meets current safety standards,
has no broken or missing parts, and that the slats are no more
than 2 3/8 inches apart. Avoid using loose bedding and
ensure the mattress fits snugly to prevent suffocation risks.
9.Question
What emotional changes should I expect as I near the end
of my pregnancy?
Answer:You may experience feelings of anxiety regarding
the upcoming responsibilities of parenthood, especially if it’s
your first child. Focusing on important decisions and
engaging in relaxation techniques can help manage these
emotions.
10.Question
What should I do if I notice signs of preterm labor?
Answer:Be on the lookout for uterine contractions, changes
in vaginal discharge, or any bright red vaginal bleeding. If
you experience six or more contractions in an hour, contact
your care provider immediately, as prompt action can prevent
complications.

Chapter 13 | Month 9: Weeks 33 to 36| Q&A
1.Question
What are the physical changes a mother experiences
during the last month of pregnancy?
Answer:In the last month of pregnancy, mothers
experience significant physical changes as their
bodies prepare for labor and delivery. Common
changes include increased fatigue from carrying the
growing baby, difficulty breathing due to the
upward pressure on the diaphragm, breast
development with growing milk-producing glands,
and softened connective tissues in the pelvic area to
facilitate childbirth. Many mothers also experience
increased urinary urgency and possible vaginal
discomfort as the baby descends further into the
pelvis.
2.Question
How does the baby develop during these weeks of late
pregnancy?
Answer:During weeks 33 to 36, the baby is rapidly gaining
weight, approximately half a pound a week. By the end of
week 36, the baby is nearing full-term, weighing around 5 to
7 pounds. This period is marked by advanced development;
the baby's lungs are maturing, fat accumulation is enhancing
body shape, and sensory responses (like reacting to light) are
becoming more refined. The baby's position also changes as
they prepare for birth, typically settling head-down in the
pelvis.
3.Question
What can parents do to prepare for labor and delivery?
Answer:To prepare for labor and delivery, parents should
consider educating themselves about the birthing process to
alleviate fears and anxieties. Attending childbirth classes,
discussing experiences with other mothers, and preparing a
detailed birth plan outlining preferences for pain relief,
support persons, and procedures can help. Practicing
relaxation techniques and ensuring flexibility in preferences
can also enhance the experience. It’s vital to communicate
openly with care providers about any questions or concerns.
4.Question
What are some exercises that can help prepare for labor?
Answer:Two beneficial exercises for preparing for labor are
Kegel exercises and perineal massage. Kegel exercises
strengthen the pelvic floor muscles, which support the uterus
and bladder and help prevent urinary incontinence. Perineal
massage helps to stretch the tissues around the vaginal
opening, potentially easing discomfort during childbirth.
Performing these exercises regularly can support a smoother
labor experience.
5.Question
How can a birth plan impact the labor and delivery
experience?
Answer:A birth plan allows parents to express their
preferences regarding various aspects of labor and delivery,
including pain management, delivery positions, and
post-birth procedures. It helps facilitate communication with
the healthcare team, enabling them to understand the parents’
desires as well as any concerns they may have. However, it’s
important for parents to remain flexible since medical
situations may require adjustments for the safety of both
mother and baby.
6.Question
What emotions might parents experience during the final
weeks of pregnancy?
Answer:The final weeks of pregnancy can be filled with a
mix of emotions, including excitement, anxiety, and
anticipation. Parents might worry about the health and
welfare of their baby, the pain of childbirth, and upcoming
changes in their lives. This time can also bring reflective
moments as they think about their journey into parenthood,
making it a blend of nervousness and joy.
7.Question
Why is it important to stay connected and informed
during pregnancy?
Answer:Staying connected and informed through discussions
with healthcare providers, attending prenatal checkups, and
engaging in educational activities can empower expectant
parents. Knowledge about pregnancy, labor, and delivery
helps reduce anxiety, allows for better decision-making, and
enhances the overall experience. Being informed also fosters
a supportive environment, as parents feel equipped to handle
challenges and changes during this transformative time.
Chapter 14 | Month 10: Weeks 37 to 40| Q&A
1.Question
What are the key signs that labor is approaching in the
final weeks of pregnancy?
Answer:In the final weeks of pregnancy, several
signs indicate that labor is approaching: 1.
**Lightening**: The baby drops lower into the
pelvis, relieving some pressure on the diaphragm. 2.
**Cervical Changes**: The cervix begins to dilate
and efface, which can start weeks before labor or
just hours before. 3. **Mucous Plug Loss**: The
loss of the mucous plug, which can happen up to two
weeks before labor. 4. **Increased Frequency of
Bursts of Energy**: Some women experience a
'nesting' instinct, where they feel the urge to clean
and prepare for the baby. 5. **Cramping and Back
Pain**: Increasing discomfort and pressure in the
pelvic area. All these signs build anticipation as your
body prepares for birth.
2.Question
How can a woman manage discomfort during the last
month of pregnancy?
Answer:Managing discomfort in the last month can involve
several strategies: 1. **Keep Active**: Engage in light
exercise or activities that help alleviate tension and keep your
mind occupied - reading, organizing baby items, or light
household chores can be helpful. 2. **Relaxation
Techniques**: Practice progressive muscle relaxation,
massage, or deep breathing exercises to ease tension. 3.
**Comfortable Positioning**: Experiment with pillows and
cushions to find supportive positions for sleeping and resting.
4. **Hydration and Nutrition**: Stay hydrated and eat light
meals to minimize digestive discomfort. 5. **Seek
Support**: Lean on your partner, family, or friends for
emotional and physical support.
3.Question
Why is it important to stay calm during labor?
Answer:Staying calm during labor is vital because fear and
anxiety can trigger a stress response that complicates the
labor process. This can lead to increased tension and pain,
referred to as the 'fear-tension-pain cycle.' Relaxation
promotes the release of endorphins, which help reduce pain
and anxiety, thereby potentially leading to a smoother labor
experience. Techniques such as breathing exercises, guided
imagery, and music can create a more peaceful environment,
helping the mother manage discomfort more effectively.
4.Question
What should a pregnant woman do if she notices
decreased fetal movement?
Answer:If a pregnant woman notices decreased fetal
movement, especially fewer than four movements in an hour,
she should contact her healthcare provider immediately.
While it's normal for movements to decrease slightly as the
baby grows and has less space, a significant reduction may
indicate a problem and should be evaluated promptly to
ensure the baby's well-being.
5.Question
What are the recommendations for inducing labor if a
woman is overdue?
Answer:If a woman is overdue, several interventions may be
recommended to induce labor, including: 1. **Membrane
Sweeping**: A procedure where the healthcare provider
separates the membranes from the uterus to trigger labor. 2.
**Cervical Ripening Agents**: Medications can be used to
soften and open the cervix. 3. **Artificial Rupture of
Membranes**: Breaking the water sac to release amniotic
fluid, which can stimulate contractions. 4. **Oxytocin
(Pitocin)**: This synthetic form of the hormone is often
administered to induce contractions. Regular monitoring of
the baby's heartbeat and overall well-being is essential during
this process.
Chapter 15 | Labor and childbirth| Q&A
1.Question
What should I do to prepare for the arrival of my baby in
the weeks leading up to labor?
Answer:1. Review your birth plan: Discuss with
your care provider about labor preferences and
familiarize yourself with standard hospital practices.
2. Preregister at the hospital: Ensure all paperwork
is completed ahead of time to avoid last-minute
stress.
3. Pack your hospital bag: Include essentials like
clothing, toiletries, and items for the baby. Consider
what you might need immediately post-delivery.
4. Try to relax: Engage in activities that bring you
joy or comfort, helping you manage anticipation and
anxiety.
2.Question
What should I expect physically as I near labor?
Answer:Your body will undergo changes such as lightening,
where the baby drops down into the pelvis, creating more
ease in breathing but increased bladder pressure. You may
experience Braxton Hicks contractions, which are warm-up
contractions that prepare your body for labor. Discharge of
the mucus plug (bloody show) may indicate that labor is
approaching.
3.Question
How can I distinguish between false labor and true labor?
Answer:In true labor:
- Contractions become regular, occurring at fixed intervals.
- They grow in intensity and last for longer durations.
- You may also experience cervical changes (effacement and
dilation).
Compared to false labor, where contractions are irregular and
do not lead to significant cervical changes.
4.Question
What are the signs that it's time to go to the hospital?
Answer:You should go to the hospital when:
- Contractions come every five minutes for at least an hour.
- Your water breaks.
- Your contractions become too intense to manage at home.
- You have been instructed by your care provider based on
your unique circumstances.
5.Question
What can my partner do to support me during labor?
Answer:Your partner can:
- Time contractions and help you gauge when to go to the
hospital.
- Keep you calm and provide emotional support.
- Help with relaxation techniques, such as breathing exercises
and massages.
- Take cues from you about what you need, whether it's
water, a cool cloth, or space.
6.Question
What does labor feel like, and how should I cope with it?
Answer:Labor pain is often described as strong menstrual
cramps, tightening, and pressure in the back, abdomen, or
thighs.
Coping strategies include implementing breathing
techniques, changing positions to ease discomfort, and using
relaxation techniques. It's important to stay focused and
remember that each contraction brings you closer to meeting
your baby.
7.Question
What happens immediately after the baby is born?
Answer:Immediately following birth, your baby will be
placed on your abdomen for skin-to-skin contact, which aids
bonding and stabilizes the baby's temperature. The umbilical
cord is clamped and cut. Medical staff will assess the baby's
health, including an Apgar score, and you may begin
breastfeeding shortly after, so long as there are no
complications.
8.Question
How does the placenta deliver after the baby is born?
Answer:After the baby is born, you will continue to have
mild contractions that help to expel the placenta. This
typically occurs within 5 to 30 minutes post-delivery. Your
healthcare provider may apply gentle pressure to help the
placenta detach from the uterine wall.
9.Question
What values should I keep in mind during labor?
Answer:Remember that labor is an individualized
experience, and it’s normal for it to be intense and sometimes
overwhelming. Maintain a positive outlook, trust your body,
and seek support from your partner and healthcare team. It's
also important to prepare for the unexpected and stay
adaptable to changing circumstances, as every labor is
unique.

Chapter 16 | Cesarean birth| Q&A
1.Question
What are some common reasons for a doctor to
recommend a cesarean delivery instead of a vaginal
birth?
Answer:Common reasons include slow or stalled
labor, abnormal fetal heart rate patterns indicating
oxygen supply issues, the baby being in a breech or
transverse position, serious maternal health
problems such as diabetes or heart disease, carrying
multiples (like twins), and complications with the
placenta or umbilical cord.
2.Question
Why might a mother choose to have an elective
C-section?
Answer:Some mothers choose elective C-sections to avoid
the experience of labor, to plan the timing of delivery for
convenience, or due to fear of vaginal delivery
complications.
3.Question
Is there a limit to how many cesarean deliveries a woman
can safely have?
Answer:Most women can safely have up to three C-sections,
but the risk of complications often increases with each
successive surgery. It's essential to discuss individual risks
with a healthcare provider.
4.Question
What are the possible risks of have a C-section?
Answer:Potential risks for the mother include increased
bleeding, infection, injury to bladder or bowel, and
complications from anesthesia. For the baby, risks involve
premature birth, respiratory problems, and rare accidental
injury during surgery.
5.Question
How should a mother prepare for a cesarean birth?
Answer:Preparation may include discussions with healthcare
providers about anesthesia options, having an IV for fluids,
undergoing blood tests, and monitoring vital signs.
Understanding the procedure can help reduce anxiety.
6.Question
How does a C-section affect the early bonding process
between the mother and baby?
Answer:While C-sections are surgical procedures that may
initially delay immediate bonding, efforts are often made by
healthcare providers to allow the mother to hold the baby as
soon as she is stable after surgery.
7.Question
What can mothers do to cope with the emotional impact
of needing an unexpected C-section?
Answer:Mothers can talk about their feelings with partners or
healthcare providers, remind themselves of the importance of
their health and their baby’s health over the delivery method,
and focus on the support they have available.
8.Question
What is vaginal seeding and what are its potential risks?
Answer:Vaginal seeding is the practice of swabbing a
C-section newborn with bacteria from the mother's vagina to
potentially boost the baby's microbiome. However, this
practice can pose serious risks of transferring infections, and
experts currently advise against it until more research is
conducted.
Chapter 17 | Your newborn| Q&A
1.Question
What should I prioritize during my hospital stay after
giving birth?
Answer:Focus on bonding with your newborn and
taking time to recover. Limit visitors and enjoy the
quiet moments with your baby. Utilize hospital staff
for guidance and support as you transition into
parenthood.
2.Question
What might my newborn look like immediately after
birth?
Answer:Your newborn might appear messy with a misshapen
head, puffy eyelids, and possibly covered in vernix. Most
newborns will look bloody, wet, and a bit disheveled due to
the birthing process.
3.Question
How can I handle visitors after I’ve just given birth?
Answer:It's perfectly acceptable to limit visitors and phone
calls to give yourself and your baby the quiet time needed to
bond and recover from the labor and delivery.
4.Question
What are common skin conditions that might affect my
newborn?
Answer:Milia (tiny white pimples), cradle cap (greasy
flakes), salmon patches (red marks), jaundice (yellow skin),
and newborn acne are common and typically resolve on their
own in time.
5.Question
How can I help my newborn adjust to feeding?
Answer:During the first few days, many newborns may not
be eager to feed. Be patient, offer breast or bottle frequently,
and consult your pediatrician if you have concerns about
their nourishment.
6.Question
Why is delayed cord clamping beneficial?
Answer:Delaying cord clamping allows for improved
development by transferring more iron from the placenta and
helping prevent anemia, especially critical for premature
babies.
7.Question
What is the purpose of the newborn screening tests?
Answer:Newborn screenings check for various genetic and
health conditions, allowing for early interventions that can be
crucial for issues that may affect long-term health.
8.Question
What should I know about my baby's appearance during
the first few days?
Answer:Expect some temporary characteristics like a swollen
scalp from delivery pressure, soft spots on the skull called
fontanels, and possibly puffy eyes due to the birthing
process.
9.Question
How can I bond with a premature baby in the NICU?
Answer:Engage in gentle contact through the isolette, hum
lullabies, talk softly to your baby, and practice kangaroo care
by holding your baby skin-to-skin.
10.Question
What are the potential risks and benefits of circumcision
for my newborn boy?
Answer:Circumcision can reduce the risk of urinary tract
infections and certain other conditions. However, it also
carries risks related to the minor surgery itself and is
considered an elective procedure.
Chapter 18 | Taking baby home| Q&A
1.Question
What are the common emotions new parents feel when
bringing their baby home for the first time?
Answer:Excitement and fear are common emotions
for new parents. The anticipation of welcoming a
new family member comes with worries about being
ready for the changes ahead, and it’s normal to feel
overwhelmed by the physical and emotional
adjustments required during the postpartum period.
2.Question
How can parents encourage their newborn’s development
during the first few weeks?
Answer:Parents can encourage their baby's development by
engaging them in face-to-face time to enhance visual
recognition, providing simple objects for the baby to focus
on, and responding to their cues for needs and comfort,
fostering a connection and communication even before they
can speak.
3.Question
What should parents do when their baby is crying, and
they are unsure of the cause?
Answer:When a baby cries, parents should first check for
basic needs such as hunger, diaper changes, or discomfort. If
those are met and the baby continues to cry, parents can try
calming techniques like swaddling, gentle rocking, speaking
softly, or offering a pacifier. If the crying persists, it may be
helpful to take a break, allowing another caregiver to step in.
4.Question
How can new parents manage colic, and what should they
keep in mind during this challenging time?
Answer:To manage colic, parents can experiment with
various calming methods like gentle rocking or white noise
and try to remain relaxed themselves, as tension can
exacerbate the baby's distress. It's essential to remember that
colic is usually temporary and doesn't indicate anything
about the child's long-term temperament.
5.Question
What is the safest sleep position for infants, and why is it
important?
Answer:The safest sleep position for infants is on their backs,
which significantly reduces the risk of sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS). Research supports that babies positioned
this way have a lower likelihood of SIDS compared to those
who sleep on their stomachs or sides.
6.Question
What are some comforting practices parents can use
when caring for a fussy baby?
Answer:Comforting practices include swaddling the baby
snugly, offering gentle rocking, using a soft voice to talk or
sing, and providing skin-to-skin contact while holding the
baby. Creating a calm environment with white noise or
gentle melodies can also help soothe a distressed infant.
7.Question
What dietary preferences do newborns exhibit, and how
does this relate to their feeding routine?
Answer:Newborns naturally prefer sweet tastes, which is
why they respond positively to breast milk, and their feeding
routines can be erratic, typically requiring feedings every two
to three hours. Recognizing cues like sucking motions or
rooting can help parents understand when their baby is
hungry.
8.Question
How should parents approach diaper rash treatment and
prevention?
Answer:To treat diaper rash, it is crucial to keep the diaper
area clean and dry, using gentle cleaning methods during
diaper changes. Preventative measures include changing
diapers frequently, allowing the baby to go without a diaper
for short periods, and using ointments that contain zinc oxide
when irritation appears.
9.Question
Why is it important for newborns to have a consistent
sleeping routine and how can parents establish one?
Answer:A consistent sleeping routine helps newborns
develop healthy sleep habits and aids in their overall growth.
Parents can establish this by maintaining low stimulation
during nighttime feedings and creating a calming bedtime
routine, which signals to the baby that it is time to sleep.
10.Question
What can new parents do to care for their infant's
umbilical cord stump safely?
Answer:To care for the umbilical cord stump, parents should
keep the area clean and dry, avoid submerging the stump in
water until it falls off, and fold the diaper down to expose the
stump to air circulation. If there are any signs of infection,
such as redness or discharge, they should contact a healthcare
provider.

Chapter 19 | Postpartum issues for mom| Q&A
1.Question
What should new mothers expect regarding changes to
their bodies postpartum?
Answer:New mothers can expect that their bodies
will take time to recover after childbirth. It's
unrealistic to expect to immediately bounce back to
pre-pregnancy shape, as the body underwent
significant changes during the 10 months of
pregnancy. Mothers are advised to give themselves
at least a month or more to begin seeing changes,
and to focus on a healthy lifestyle to facilitate
recovery.
2.Question
What are some effective ways to deal with breast
engorgement for breastfeeding mothers?
Answer:To ease engorgement, mothers can express a little
milk either manually or by breastfeeding, use cold
compresses between feedings, and wear a supportive bra.
These steps help relieve discomfort caused by overfilled
breasts.
3.Question
Why is breast self-awareness important during
breastfeeding, and how can mothers perform it
effectively?
Answer:Breast self-awareness is crucial even while
breastfeeding, as the breasts feel different during this time.
To perform effective self-examinations, mothers should
check for lumps immediately after breastfeeding when their
breasts are emptier and more comfortable.
4.Question
How can new mothers handle sore or cracked nipples
while breastfeeding?
Answer:To prevent and treat sore or cracked nipples, mothers
should ensure proper latch techniques, express breast milk to
apply on sore nipples for healing, air dry the nipples
post-feed, and use ointments like lanolin. If issues persist,
consulting a lactation specialist is advisable.
5.Question
What can help alleviate the discomfort of bowel and
urination problems postpartum?
Answer:To alleviate discomfort during bowel movements,
new mothers should eat fiber-rich foods, drink plenty of
fluids, and stay physically active. For urination issues, sitting
in warm water or using a squirt bottle can help ease the
process.
6.Question
What strategies can new mothers employ to manage
fatigue after giving birth?
Answer:New mothers should make time for rest whenever
possible, share baby care responsibilities with partners,
accept help from family and friends, and focus on a nutritious
diet. Engaging in regular exercise can also gradually increase
energy levels.
7.Question
How should new mothers handle hair loss and skin
changes after childbirth?
Answer:New mothers can manage hair loss by maintaining a
healthy diet and possibly continuing vitamin supplements to
support hair regrowth. For skin changes like stretch marks
and discoloration, it's important to know that fading may
occur over time but complete disappearance is rare.
8.Question
What are some signs that a mother might need to speak to
a care provider regarding postpartum mental health?
Answer:If mood changes last longer than two weeks, or if
symptoms include severe anxiety, persistent sadness, or
feelings of hopelessness, the mother should reach out to her
care provider for support. Symptoms like disinterest in the
baby or overwhelming emotional responses also warrant
attention.
9.Question
How can mothers bond with their newborn while
managing daily care tasks?
Answer:Mothers can bond with their newborns by talking,
singing, and cuddling during everyday tasks like feeding and
diaper changes. Making eye contact and responsive
caregiving during these routines can enhance emotional
connection.
Chapter 20 | Managing as parents| Q&A
1.Question
What are some common feelings new parents experience
when bringing home a baby for the first time?
Answer:Common feelings include amazement and
enjoyment, complete love for the child, feelings of
unpreparedness and powerlessness, loss of a
previous lifestyle, frustration with lack of personal
time, and fatigue. It's a mix of emotions as they
navigate this new role.
2.Question
How can new parents simplify their goals during the
transition to parenthood?
Answer:New parents can simplify goals by focusing on one
task at a time, such as making bathing the baby a significant
event for the day, rather than overwhelming themselves with
too many responsibilities. This helps to create a sense of
achievement.
3.Question
What are the benefits of reaching out for help after
bringing a baby home?
Answer:Accepting help from family or friends can relieve
some household burdens, allowing parents to rest and spend
quality time with their baby. It fosters a supportive
environment, making the transition easier.
4.Question
How can humor help new parents cope with the
challenges of parenthood?
Answer:Maintaining a sense of humor helps parents adapt to
their new roles and responsibilities. Finding laughter in
challenging situations can relieve tension, reduce stress, and
help parents feel more connected.
5.Question
What is the significance of setting realistic expectations
before becoming parents?
Answer:Setting realistic expectations helps couples navigate
the stresses of parenthood more effectively. This awareness
of potential challenges contributes to better mutual support
and satisfaction in the relationship.
6.Question
What are some strategies for sharing nighttime baby
duties between partners?
Answer:Partners can work out a schedule to share nighttime
responsibilities, like taking turns with feedings and diaper
changes. This collaboration allows both parents to get
adequate rest and feel involved in parenting.
7.Question
Why is maintaining a personal connection between
parents important after the baby arrives?
Answer:Maintaining a personal connection helps strengthen
the marriage, allowing both partners to support each other
better. Investing time in the relationship fosters a healthier
family environment and sets a positive example for the child.
8.Question
What coping strategies can single parents use to manage
the demands of parenting?
Answer:Single parents can gather support from family and
friends, seek reliable childcare, provide strong role models
for their child, make dedicated time for their child, and
ensure they take time for themselves to recharge.
9.Question
What does the book suggest about financial planning for
raising a child?
Answer:The book emphasizes the importance of budgeting
for the various expenses of raising a child, such as housing,
food, and childcare. It advises parents to look for discounts
and efficient ways to manage these costs.
10.Question
How can new parents embrace the chaos that comes with
having a baby?
Answer:Embracing chaos means accepting that life will be
more cluttered and unpredictable, and it’s okay to let go of
strict organization. Parents should focus on flexibility and
adapt to the new family dynamics.
Chapter 21 | Genetic screening| Q&A
1.Question
Why is it important for expectant parents to consider
genetic screening?
Answer:Genetic screening provides expectant
parents with valuable information about the risks of
genetic disorders in their child. Understanding
potential risks allows parents to make informed
decisions about their pregnancy and future family
planning. As most babies are born healthy,
awareness and preparation can empower parents.
2.Question
What types of genetic screening tests are available before
and during pregnancy?
Answer:Available options include family-history-based
screening, ethnic-based screening, expanded carrier screening
(ECS), and prenatal testing. These tests can identify whether
parents are carriers of genetic disorders and help assess risks
during early pregnancy.
3.Question
How can knowing about a family history of genetic
disorders impact prenatal decisions?
Answer:Knowing about a family history of genetic disorders
can lead parents to pursue specific genetic testing, which
may guide them in making informed choices about
continuing the pregnancy or preparing for potential health
challenges.
4.Question
What is expanded carrier screening (ECS), and how does
it differ from traditional genetic tests?
Answer:ECS is a more comprehensive genetic test that
screens for a wide array of genetic disorders regardless of
family or ethnic background. Unlike more targeted tests,
ECS provides a broader understanding of potential conditions
that may affect a child, though it may not be as accurate for
specific diseases.
5.Question
How should expectant parents emotionally prepare for
the results of genetic screening?
Answer:Parents should acknowledge that genetic testing may
lead to unexpected results concerning their child's health. It’s
essential to have a support system in place and consider
speaking with healthcare professionals to process emotions
and understand implications.
6.Question
What factors should parents consider before opting for
genetic screening?
Answer:Before choosing genetic screening, parents should
consider family history, ethnic background, emotional
responses, insurance coverage, costs, and whether counseling
from a geneticist or counselor could benefit their
decision-making process.
7.Question
How does understanding the types of genetic disorders
influence parenting decisions?
Answer:Understanding the nature of genetic disorders can
help parents weigh their options—such as preparing for
potential health challenges, considering additional testing, or
making informed decisions about future pregnancies.
8.Question
What role do healthcare providers play in genetic
screening during pregnancy?
Answer:Healthcare providers guide expectant parents
through the genetic screening process, offer testing options,
interpret results, and provide essential support for the
emotional challenges that may arise from the testing
outcomes.
9.Question
How can parents cope with the emotional impact of
receiving news about a potential genetic disorder?
Answer:Parents can cope by seeking support from family,
friends, or professionals specializing in genetic counseling.
Engaging with a community or support group can also
provide comfort and shared experiences.
10.Question
What steps should parents take if a genetic disorder is
identified during screening?
Answer:If a genetic disorder is identified, parents should
work closely with healthcare providers to explore the
implications, understand treatment options, and receive
emotional and logistical support for managing the condition.

Chapter 22 | Prenatal testing| Q&A
1.Question
What is the purpose of prenatal testing?
Answer:Prenatal testing serves to determine the
health of the baby while still in the womb,
particularly for parents concerned about genetic
disorders or chromosomal problems due to age or
family history. It provides crucial information that
can help prepare parents for potential health issues
or inform care strategies during and after
pregnancy.
2.Question
What are the two main types of prenatal tests?
Answer:The two main types of prenatal tests are screening
tests and diagnostic tests. Screening tests are noninvasive and
aim to identify pregnancies at higher risk for certain
conditions, while diagnostic tests are usually offered when a
risk is indicated, providing a more definitive diagnosis.
3.Question
Why might parents choose not to have prenatal testing?
Answer:Parents might opt out of prenatal testing if they feel
that the information won't affect their pregnancy decisions or
if they wish to avoid the anxiety that may come from
uncertain results, especially since most tests return normal
results.
4.Question
What factors should parents consider before undergoing
prenatal testing?
Answer:Parents should consider how they will use the
information provided by the tests, the accuracy of the results,
the potential anxiety caused by testing, the risks involved in
the procedures, and the costs or insurance coverage related to
the tests.
5.Question
What information can an ultrasound provide about the
pregnancy?
Answer:Ultrasound can provide vital information such as the
number of babies, gestational age, growth and development
status, heart rate, and any structural abnormalities. It can also
determine the location and health of the placenta and even
the sex of the baby, depending on the baby's position.
6.Question
How accurate is the first trimester combined screening?
Answer:The first trimester combined screening accurately
identifies about 85% of pregnancies with Down syndrome
and has a false-positive rate of approximately 5%.
7.Question
What should parents do if screening tests indicate a
potential problem?
Answer:If screening tests indicate a potential problem,
parents should consult their care provider about the accuracy
of the results and the next steps, which may include more
invasive diagnostic testing or referrals to specialists.
8.Question
What are the potential risks associated with diagnostic
tests like CVS and amniocentesis?
Answer:The potential risks of diagnostic tests like chorionic
villus sampling (CVS) and amniocentesis include
miscarriage (approximately 1 in 455 for CVS and about 1 in
900 for amniocentesis), bleeding, infection, and
complications related to needle insertion.
9.Question
How can prenatal screening benefit parents?
Answer:Prenatal screening can provide peace of mind by
determining the risk of genetic conditions early on, allowing
for informed decisions and preparation for special care if a
condition is detected.
10.Question
What should couples discuss if they receive unexpected
prenatal test results?
Answer:Couples should discuss the accuracy of the results,
implications for the baby's health, possible treatments, and
resources available for support. They might also consider
counseling services to assist them through the
decision-making process.
Chapter 23 | Breast-feeding| Q&A
1.Question
What are the key benefits of breastfeeding for my baby?
Answer:Breastfeeding provides ideal nutrition
tailored for your baby's needs, offering the right
balance of fats, proteins, carbohydrates, vitamins,
and minerals. It contains antibodies that boost your
baby's immune system, helping to reduce the
incidence of common illnesses like colds, ear
infections, and urinary tract infections. Additionally,
breastfed babies tend to have lower risks of asthma,
food allergies, and obesity later in life, along with
potential long-term benefits such as a decreased risk
of heart disease and diabetes.
2.Question
What should I do if I find breastfeeding challenging?
Answer:If you encounter difficulties with breastfeeding,
remember that it’s a learning process for both you and your
baby. Be patient and seek assistance from healthcare
providers, lactation consultants, or support groups. It's also
beneficial to attend a breastfeeding class before delivery to
equip yourself with knowledge and techniques that can ease
the transition.
3.Question
Is it normal to feel overwhelmed when starting to
breastfeed?
Answer:Yes, it is completely normal to feel overwhelmed in
the early days of breastfeeding. Many new mothers
experience this as it can be physically demanding and
requires adjustment. Take it one feeding at a time, be kind to
yourself, and remember that seeking support from friends,
family, or professionals can help ease the anxiety.
4.Question
What are some signs that my baby is hungry?
Answer:Watch for cues from your baby indicating hunger,
such as sucking on their lips or fingers, rooting (turning their
head toward the breast), making small noises, or crying. Each
baby has their own pattern, and learning these signs will help
you respond appropriately and foster a better feeding
relationship.
5.Question
How can I ensure that I’m producing enough milk for my
baby?
Answer:Milk production typically follows the supply and
demand principle; the more your baby feeds, the more milk
you’ll produce. Ensure you breastfeed regularly, recognize
hunger cues, and nurse on both breasts at each feeding. If you
have concerns about your milk supply, consult a lactation
consultant or healthcare provider for guidance.
6.Question
What kind of support can partners provide during
breastfeeding?
Answer:Partners can play a crucial role by helping to create a
comfortable environment for breastfeeding, attending classes,
and assisting with household chores to allow the
breastfeeding mother to rest. They can also help provide
emotional support and encouragement, making the entire
experience more manageable and enjoyable.
7.Question
What should I know about the importance of skin-to-skin
contact after delivery?
Answer:Skin-to-skin contact immediately after delivery
promotes bonding between mother and baby, stimulates
breastfeeding instincts, and can improve breastfeeding
outcomes. If possible, hold your baby against your skin
within the first hour after delivery to encourage the
breastfeeding relationship right from the start.
8.Question
How can I deal with engorgement when my milk comes
in?
Answer:Engorgement occurs when your breasts become
overly full and uncomfortable. To alleviate this, you can
express a small amount of milk by hand or pump to relieve
pressure before nursing. Additionally, applying warmth
before feeding can help facilitate milk flow, and wearing a
supportive nursing bra can provide comfort.
9.Question
What are the benefits of breastfeeding for me as a
mother?
Answer:Breastfeeding can lead to a quicker recovery after
childbirth, as it encourages uterine contractions that help
return your body to its pre-pregnancy state. It may delay the
return of your menstrual cycle, reducing the risk of
unintended pregnancies. Furthermore, breastfeeding has been
linked to lower risks of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, and
even certain heart conditions.
10.Question
When should I introduce a bottle to my breastfed baby?
Answer:It’s generally recommended to wait until
breastfeeding is well-established, usually around 4 to 6
weeks, before introducing a bottle. This helps ensure that the
baby is comfortable breastfeeding and minimizes the risk of
nipple confusion. Once you feel confident with
breastfeeding, introducing a bottle will allow other family
members to participate in feedings.
Chapter 24 | Pain relief during childbirth| Q&A
1.Question
What factors should I consider when choosing pain relief
during labor?
Answer:Consider the method's involvement, its
effects on you and your baby, its onset and duration,
whether it needs prior organization, its
compatibility with other methods, its availability
during labor, and if it can be used at home.
2.Question
How does the presence of a doula contribute to
childbirth?
Answer:A doula provides continuous emotional support,
encouragement, and practical assistance with techniques like
breathing and relaxation. They can mediate between you and
healthcare providers, ensuring your wishes are understood.
3.Question
Is it normal to change your mind about pain relief during
labor?
Answer:Yes, it’s completely normal to reassess your pain
relief preferences as labor progresses. Being flexible helps
you adapt to your unique experience.
4.Question
What role does education about childbirth play in pain
management?
Answer:Education about what to expect during labor can
alleviate fear, which is known to exacerbate pain.
Understanding your pain relief options empowers you to
make informed decisions.
5.Question
How can I find a doula if I want one?
Answer:You can ask your healthcare provider or the birthing
center for recommendations, as some facilities offer doula
services. Additionally, there are numerous online resources
and directories to locate a doula.
6.Question
What is the difference between analgesics and anesthetics
in labor?
Answer:Analgesics reduce pain perception while you remain
conscious, whereas anesthetics block sensation entirely.
Epidurals and spinal blocks are common types of anesthetics
used during childbirth.
7.Question
Why is it important to have a birth plan?
Answer:A birth plan helps articulate your preferences and
instills a sense of control, but it’s essential to remain flexible
as circumstances in labor may require changes.
8.Question
Are doulas essential during childbirth?
Answer:No, but they can be beneficial, especially for
first-time and single mothers. Their support complements
medical staff but is not always necessary.
9.Question
Can I combine different pain relief methods during
labor?
Answer:Yes, many women choose to use a combination of
pain relief methods to tailor their experience to fit their
needs.
10.Question
How might the duration of labor influence pain
management choices?
Answer:Longer labors may lead to increased discomfort, so
women may opt for stronger or immediate pain relief
methods as the labor progresses.

Chapter 25 | Elective cesarean birth| Q&A
1.Question
What are some common fears women have that lead them
to consider an elective cesarean delivery?
Answer:Women may fear labor and delivery pain,
potential damage to the pelvic floor, or issues like
urinary incontinence and sexual problems after
childbirth. The uncertainty associated with
first-time labor and the negative experiences of
others can heighten these fears.
2.Question
How can women make a more informed decision about
whether to have an elective cesarean?
Answer:Women should engage in open discussions with their
healthcare provider about their fears and preferences. It’s
important to educate themselves about the risks and benefits
of both cesarean and vaginal deliveries, weighing the pros
and cons carefully to not let fear dictate their choice.
3.Question
What are the maternal benefits of choosing an elective
cesarean birth?
Answer:Elective cesareans may offer benefits such as
reduced risk of emergency C-sections, decreased postpartum
hemorrhage, avoidance of difficult labor complications, and
scheduling convenience, which can contribute to better
preparation and peace of mind for the mother.
4.Question
What are the potential risks associated with elective
cesarean births?
Answer:Risks include longer hospital stays, higher infection
rates due to surgery, complications from anesthesia, potential
difficulties with initial bonding and breastfeeding, and
long-term complications with subsequent pregnancies.
5.Question
What support should women seek if they had a negative
birthing experience previously?
Answer:Women should discuss their previous negative
experiences with their care providers or trusted support
individuals to understand the reasons for those challenges.
This can help them identify ways to ensure a different, more
positive experience in their current pregnancy.
6.Question
Why is the timing of an elective cesarean important?
Answer:Scheduling an elective cesarean should occur no
earlier than 39 weeks to ensure the baby's health and safety,
allowing for better lung development and reduced risks
associated with prematurity.
7.Question
What should women consider if their healthcare provider
does not support their request for an elective cesarean?
Answer:If a provider does not support the decision for an
elective cesarean, women can ask for a referral to another
provider who may honor their request. It's critical to ensure
any decision made prioritizes the well-being of both mother
and child.
8.Question
How does the decision-making process for elective
cesareans reflect on medical ethics?
Answer:Elective cesareans highlight ethical dilemmas in
healthcare: while women have the right to choose their
birthing methods, providers must weigh the lack of clear
evidence supporting the necessity of the procedure against
their commitment to avoiding unnecessary medical risks.
9.Question
What is a controversial aspect of elective cesarean
deliveries?
Answer:The controversy lies in the debate over a woman's
right to choose versus the medical community's concerns
about elective cesareans lacking clear health benefits and
potentially increasing risks for both mother and baby.
10.Question
What emotional support strategies can women employ to
cope with fears about childbirth?
Answer:Engaging in childbirth education classes, finding
supportive birth partners, and reframing narratives around
childbirth by avoiding negative stories can help reduce
anxiety and fear about the birthing process.
Chapter 26 | Vaginal birth after a cesarean birth|
Q&A
1.Question
What are the potential benefits of choosing a vaginal
birth after cesarean (VBAC)?
Answer:The benefits of VBAC include a generally
safer delivery when compared to a C-section,
reduced risk of complications (such as blood
transfusions, infections, and hemorrhage), shorter
hospital stays, quicker recovery to normal activities,
and a greater sense of involvement in the delivery
process.
2.Question
What are the key risks associated with attempting a
VBAC?
Answer:Key risks of VBAC include the possibility of failing
to deliver vaginally, which may result in complications from
a repeat cesarean, and the rare but serious risk of uterine
rupture, which could be life-threatening for both mother and
baby.
3.Question
How does the type of uterine incision play a role in
deciding if a woman is a candidate for VBAC?
Answer:The type of uterine incision is crucial; a low
transverse incision generally allows for a higher chance of
successful VBAC, while a classical incision is associated
with higher risk and typically rules out VBAC. Women with
an unknown type of incision may still be candidates unless a
classical incision is suspected.
4.Question
What factors might indicate that a woman should not
attempt a VBAC?
Answer:Women should avoid VBAC if they have a prior
classical incision, a history of uterine rupture, certain medical
conditions that preclude vaginal delivery, or access to
facilities unable to perform emergency cesarean deliveries.
5.Question
What tips can help a woman successfully plan for a
VBAC?
Answer:To plan for a successful VBAC, discuss fears and
expectations with your care provider, take VBAC classes
with your labor coach, ensure delivery at a well-equipped
hospital, and maintain a positive mindset while focusing on a
healthy outcome for both mother and baby.
6.Question
Why do many women choose not to attempt VBAC
despite being candidates?
Answer:Many women opt against VBAC due to fears of
prolonged labor that may end in cesarean delivery and
limited access to facilities prepared to handle VBAC safely.
7.Question
How can a woman improve her chances of a successful
VBAC?
Answer:Increasing the chances of a successful VBAC can
include educating herself about the process, maintaining a
healthy lifestyle, having constant monitoring during labor,
and openly communicating with her care provider about her
preferences and concerns.
Chapter 27 | Contraception after delivery| Q&A
1.Question
Why is it important to consider birth control options after
delivery?
Answer:It's crucial to consider birth control soon
after delivery because you can become pregnant
even before your first postpartum period. With
conception occurring again within 18 months, there
are potential health risks for both the mother and
baby, including increased risks for autism, nutrient
depletion, and the challenges of managing infant
care while pregnant.
2.Question
What factors should one consider when choosing a
method of contraception?
Answer:Consider effectiveness, convenience, impact on
breast milk supply (if breastfeeding), potential side effects,
additional health benefits, and partner preferences. Each
method has different effectiveness rates and side effects,
making it essential to align your choice with your lifestyle
and health situation.
3.Question
What birth control methods are available for
breastfeeding mothers?
Answer:Breastfeeding mothers can safely opt for
progestin-only methods like the minipill, hormonal IUDs,
contraceptive implants, and Depo-Provera shots. These
options do not typically affect milk supply and are
recommended over combined hormonal contraceptives,
which may risk reducing milk production.
4.Question
Can breastfeeding prevent pregnancy?
Answer:Breastfeeding can reduce fertility and function as a
form of contraception for up to six months if done
exclusively and on demand. However, this is not a reliable
method as ovulation can occur before the first postpartum
period, making it possible to become pregnant unexpectedly.
5.Question
What should a mother consider regarding her health
when choosing a contraceptive method?
Answer:A mother should evaluate her medical history,
existing health risks (such as blood clotting issues), and any
past complications with pregnancy or contraceptive methods.
This assessment ensures that the chosen contraceptive
method aligns with her health status and minimizes the risk
of adverse effects.
6.Question
How can a woman determine when she is most fertile if
using natural family planning?
Answer:Natural family planning requires tracking ovulation
signs such as calendar days, cervical changes, mucus
consistency, and basal body temperature. Understanding
these signs helps determine fertile and infertile days each
month.
7.Question
What are the advantages of using IUDs as a contraceptive
method?
Answer:IUDs provide long-term, effective contraception
without the need for daily attention or regular doctor visits
once inserted. They can remain effective for several years,
and depending on the type, may also lighten menstrual
bleeding.
8.Question
What role do partners play in the decision-making
process for birth control?
Answer:Partners should communicate openly about their
preferences and concerns regarding birth control methods.
Mutual agreement on contraceptive choices promotes shared
responsibility in managing family planning and enhances
relationship satisfaction.
9.Question
Why is it essential to understand the potential side effects
of different contraceptive methods?
Answer:Understanding side effects allows individuals to
make informed choices about their contraceptive options,
weigh the risks against benefits, and anticipate how these
methods might impact their daily lives, health, and
well-being.
10.Question
What considerations should one make regarding religious
beliefs when choosing contraception?
Answer:A person should weigh how various contraceptive
methods align with their religious or cultural values. Certain
methods may conflict with personal beliefs, making it
important to choose an option that is acceptable within their
ethical framework.

Chapter 28 | PART 5: Symptoms guide| Q&A
1.Question
What can I do to relieve abdominal discomfort during
pregnancy?
Answer:If you experience abdominal discomfort,
consider sitting or lying down to relieve the
pressure. Soaking in a warm bath or practicing
relaxation exercises can also help alleviate
discomfort.
2.Question
When should I seek medical help for abdominal pain?
Answer:You should call your care provider immediately if
the abdominal pain is severe, persistent, or accompanied by
fever, vaginal bleeding, burning with urination,
gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, or if you begin to have
contractions.
3.Question
What should I do to prevent or manage heartburn during
pregnancy?
Answer:To manage heartburn, eat smaller meals more
frequently instead of large meals, avoid foods that trigger
symptoms (such as fatty or spicy foods), drink plenty of
water, and wait at least one hour after eating before lying
down.
4.Question
How can I cope with fatigue during pregnancy?
Answer:To cope with fatigue, prioritize rest and accept that
you may need more sleep. It's also beneficial to exercise
regularly, eat a balanced diet that includes enough iron and
protein, and ask for help with responsibilities.
5.Question
What are some common symptoms of sciatica during
pregnancy, and how can I relieve it?
Answer:Common symptoms of sciatica include pain,
tingling, or numbness down your leg. To alleviate
discomfort, consider warm baths, alternating between hot and
cold compresses, and regular movement or stretching.
6.Question
What should I do if I notice a significant change in my
baby's movement patterns?
Answer:If you notice any major changes in your baby's
activity level after 22 weeks, such as a significant decrease or
complete absence of movements over 24 hours, contact your
care provider immediately.
7.Question
What should I do to manage food aversions during
pregnancy?
Answer:As long as you are getting the necessary nutrients
from other foods, food aversions are usually not a problem. If
you're averse to healthy foods, find alternatives that can still
provide the necessary nutrients.
8.Question
What are the signs of a potential urinary tract infection
during pregnancy?
Answer:Signs of a UTI include pain or burning when
urinating, a frequent urgent need to urinate, blood in the
urine, strong-smelling urine, mild fever, or bladder
tenderness.
9.Question
How can I implement healthy skin care to manage
pregnancy-related skin changes like acne?
Answer:To manage acne during pregnancy, continue a
regular skincare routine while avoiding irritants like facial
scrubs. Use water-based or noncomedogenic products to
reduce the likelihood of clogged pores.
10.Question
What should I expect regarding mood swings during
pregnancy?
Answer:Mood swings are common during pregnancy due to
hormonal changes and can range from joy to irritability. It's
helpful to maintain a supportive network and practice
relaxation techniques to manage stress.
Chapter 29 | Issues during pregnancy| Q&A
1.Question
What should be my main focus if I am facing a
complication during pregnancy?
Answer:Your main focus should be to listen to your
care provider's advice and ask questions until you
fully understand the complication, its implications,
and how to treat or manage it effectively. This
proactive approach helps in alleviating concerns and
empowers you in your pregnancy journey.
2.Question
What is Rh factor incompatibility, and how is it managed
during pregnancy?
Answer:Rh factor incompatibility occurs when an
Rh-negative mother is pregnant with an Rh-positive baby,
leading to the mother's immune system potentially attacking
the baby’s red blood cells. Management includes
administering Rh immune globulin (RhIg) injections to
prevent antibody formation during the pregnancy and at the
time of delivery, thus ensuring the baby's health.
3.Question
What are the signs of iron deficiency anemia during
pregnancy?
Answer:Signs of iron deficiency anemia can include
excessive tiredness, weakness, pale skin, shortness of breath,
dizziness, heart palpitations, and cravings for non-food items
(pica). If you experience these symptoms, it is important to
speak with your care provider for proper diagnosis and
treatment.
4.Question
How is cervical incompetence treated if detected during
pregnancy?
Answer:Cervical incompetence can be treated by stitching
the cervix closed, a procedure known as cerclage. This
procedure is most effective when performed early in the
pregnancy, ideally before the 20th week.
5.Question
What strategies can help combat depression during
pregnancy?
Answer:Combatting depression during pregnancy often
involves a combination of counseling, behavioral therapy,
and sometimes antidepressant medications that are safe for
use during pregnancy. Building a support network with
friends, family, or community members can also be
invaluable.
6.Question
What should I do if I suspect I am in preterm labor?
Answer:If you suspect you are in preterm labor, it is vital to
contact your healthcare provider immediately. Even if
unsure, it’s better to be evaluated than to take risks, as early
intervention can significantly impact outcomes.
7.Question
What are the potential complications of gestational
diabetes for both mother and baby?
Answer:Uncontrolled gestational diabetes can lead to
excessive birth weight for the baby, leading to delivery
complications, and can increase the risk of preterm birth,
breathing difficulties, and long-term health issues for the
baby, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes. For mothers, it
raises the risk of high blood pressure and the chance of
developing type 2 diabetes later in life.
8.Question
What should I avoid to decrease the risk of listeriosis
during pregnancy?
Answer:To decrease the risk of listeriosis, avoid consuming
unpasteurized dairy products, deli meats that haven’t been
properly stored, and any contaminated foods. Cooking meats
properly and practicing good hygiene can help prevent
infection.
9.Question
What preventive measures can be taken against Zika
virus during pregnancy?
Answer:To prevent Zika virus exposure, avoid traveling to
areas where Zika is prevalent, wear insect repellent when
outdoors, and use protective clothing. If traveling is
unavoidable, take precautions against mosquito bites and
consult your healthcare provider for additional strategies.
10.Question
Why is preparation important during pregnancy,
especially for preterm labor risks?
Answer:Preparation during pregnancy allows for timely and
informed responses to complications such as preterm labor.
Understanding the signs, having a plan of action, and
maintaining regular communication with your healthcare
provider can result in better outcomes for both mother and
baby.
Chapter 30 | Problems of labor and childbirth| Q&A
1.Question
What should I do if complications arise during labor and
I feel out of control?
Answer:In situations where complications occur
during labor, it's crucial to remain as flexible as
possible and try not to panic. Trust in your care
provider and the healthcare team, who are trained
to handle emergencies. Communicate openly—ask
questions about your concerns, possible outcomes,
and the care plan. Together with your provider, you
can decide the best next steps for you and your baby.
2.Question
What are some reasons a healthcare provider might
recommend inducing labor?
Answer:Induction may be recommended for several
important reasons, such as reaching 41 weeks or more of
pregnancy, having broken water without labor starting,
experiencing an infection in the uterus, if the baby shows
reduced activity or growth, or if health complications arise
for the mother, like high blood pressure or diabetes.
Induction is a proactive measure to ensure the health and
safety of both mother and baby.
3.Question
How can labor be induced once it's decided that induction
is necessary?
Answer:Labor can be induced via various methods, often
starting with cervical ripening to soften and open the cervix.
This can involve medications like misoprostol or mechanical
techniques like inserting a balloon catheter. Once the cervix
is ready, methods like breaking the water or administering
oxytocin (Pitocin) may be used to initiate or strengthen
contractions, thereby guiding the labor process towards
delivery.
4.Question
What happens if labor fails to progress and how is it
treated?
Answer:If labor fails to progress, a condition known as
dystocia may arise, which can be due to weak contractions,
an improperly positioned baby, or pelvic constraints.
Treatment may involve medications to stimulate
contractions, breaking the water to encourage labor, or using
oxytocin to help move the labor forward. Continuous
monitoring by the healthcare team allows them to make
timely interventions as needed.
5.Question
Under what circumstances might assisted delivery be
necessary during labor?
Answer:Assisted delivery may be necessary if labor is
prolonged or complications arise during the pushing stage.
This includes situations where the baby is stuck in the birth
canal due to positioning issues, or if the mother's energy is
spent after an extended pushing phase. Instruments like
forceps or a vacuum extractor may be employed to safely
guide the baby out. This decision depends on the baby's
descent and mother's exhaustion.
6.Question
What complications should I be aware of in relation to
the baby's position during labor?
Answer:Issues can arise if the baby is in an abnormal
position, such as facing up (occiput posterior) or being
breech (buttocks or feet first). These positions can cause
prolonged labor or complications, including the risk of cord
compression. Care providers can sometimes attempt to help
reposition the baby manually or advise on a cesarean delivery
if necessary, prioritizing the safety of both mother and baby.
7.Question
What signs indicate that a baby might not be tolerating
labor well?
Answer:A baby is considered to be intolerant of labor if there
are persistent signs of inadequate oxygen supply, often
monitored through changes in fetal heart rate. Indicators may
include a consistently high or low heart rate. Monitoring is
crucial, and if distress is detected, immediate actions, such as
administering oxygen to the mother or preparing for
emergency cesarean delivery, may be necessary.

Chapter 31 | Managing mom’s health concerns|
Q&A
1.Question
How can I effectively manage my pre-existing health
conditions during pregnancy?
Answer:Managing pre-existing health conditions
during pregnancy involves close collaboration with
your healthcare provider. It is essential to discuss
your specific health issues—such as asthma,
diabetes, or depression—with a qualified medical
professional who can tailor a treatment plan that
ensures both your health and the safety of your
baby. For instance, continuing any necessary
medications under your doctor's guidance,
modifying lifestyle choices like diet and exercise, and
attending regular prenatal appointments are vital.
The goal is to maintain control over any condition,
thereby minimizing risks associated with pregnancy.
2.Question
What are the potential risks associated with untreated
asthma during pregnancy?
Answer:Untreated asthma during pregnancy can lead to low
oxygen levels in the mother, which in turn decreases the
oxygen available to the fetus. This can potentially result in
slowed fetal growth, increased risk of preterm birth, and even
brain development issues. Effective management is crucial;
expectant mothers should continue using their prescribed
asthma medications unless advised otherwise by their
healthcare provider.
3.Question
Why is it important to manage depression during
pregnancy?
Answer:Managing depression during pregnancy is crucial as
untreated depression can lead to severe consequences for
both the mother and the baby. Studies show that maternal
depression is linked to preterm birth, lower birth weight, and
developmental issues in children. It’s essential to
communicate with your healthcare provider about any mental
health concerns to ensure appropriate treatment and support,
which is important for both the mother’s well-being and the
baby's health.
4.Question
What steps should I take if diagnosed with gestational
diabetes?
Answer:If diagnosed with gestational diabetes, the first step
is to work closely with your healthcare team to develop a
management plan. This may include monitoring blood sugar
levels regularly, following a balanced diet tailored to
maintain healthy blood sugar ranges, and incorporating
physical activities suited to your condition. In some cases,
insulin therapy may be necessary. It's important to attend all
follow-up appointments to monitor your baby’s growth and
adjust your management plan as needed.
5.Question
How can I prepare for the possibility of cancer treatment
during pregnancy?
Answer:Preparation for cancer treatment during pregnancy
involves a comprehensive discussion with your healthcare
team, including an oncologist and obstetrician. It’s crucial to
understand the specific type of cancer and its treatment
options while considering the timing and effects on both
mother and baby. Your team may discuss scheduling
treatments during trimesters when the risk to the fetus is
lower, and they might suggest options that mitigate risks
such as surgery or chemotherapy. Early intervention often
leads to better outcomes.
6.Question
What should I know about managing high blood pressure
during pregnancy?
Answer:Managing high blood pressure during pregnancy
requires careful monitoring and communication with your
healthcare provider. It's vital to have your blood pressure
checked regularly and to adhere to prescribed medications
that are safe during pregnancy. Lifestyle changes such as a
healthy diet, regular exercise, and avoiding excessive salt can
also help. Be vigilant for any symptoms that might indicate
worsened hypertension, and make sure to discuss your birth
plan to prevent complications during labor.
7.Question
How can women with lupus effectively navigate
pregnancy?
Answer:Women with lupus can navigate pregnancy
successfully by being proactive about their health. This
includes having stable disease management before
conception and during pregnancy, closely monitoring
symptoms, and maintaining regular check-ups with a
healthcare provider experienced in high-risk pregnancies.
Adjustments to medication may be necessary to protect both
mother and baby. Understanding the increased risks, such as
preeclampsia, and utilizing a supportive care team helps
ensure a healthier pregnancy.
8.Question
What role does nutrition play in managing
phenylketonuria (PKU) during pregnancy?
Answer:Nutrition is critical in managing phenylketonuria
(PKU) during pregnancy. Women planning to conceive
should aim to maintain low levels of phenylalanine through a
strictly controlled diet that minimizes protein intake from
sources high in phenylalanine, such as meats and dairy.
Consulting with a dietitian experienced in PKU can help
create a safe eating plan that provides necessary nutrients
while keeping phenylalanine levels in check, thus protecting
the developing baby from potential brain damage.
9.Question
What precautions should be taken for women with sickle
cell disease during pregnancy?
Answer:Women with sickle cell disease should approach
pregnancy with a comprehensive management plan that
involves regular check-ups with healthcare providers who
understand the complexities of their condition. Key
precautions include monitoring for complications such as
infections or crises, maintaining hydration, and possibly
adjusting medications that help manage sickle cell
symptoms. Having a detailed plan for pain management
during labor—which might include a team of specialists—is
also crucial.
10.Question
How can I seek support for postpartum depression?
Answer:Seeking support for postpartum depression involves
several steps. Start by reaching out to your healthcare
provider, who can recommend appropriate treatment options,
such as therapy or medication. Joining support groups for
new mothers or talking with friends and family can provide
emotional backing. Self-care is vital; ensure you're sleeping,
eating well, engaging in light physical activity, and allowing
time for yourself. Remember, asking for help is a strength,
and addressing postpartum depression is essential for both
your well-being and your baby’s.
Chapter 32 | Pregnancy loss| Q&A
1.Question
What should I understand about the emotional effects of
pregnancy loss?
Answer:Pregnancy loss can lead to intense feelings
of grief, confusion, and fear. It's important to
recognize that grieving is a vital and personal
process that varies from person to person. Allow
yourself to feel your emotions fully, whether they
include sadness, anger, or despair, and seek support
from loved ones or professionals if needed.
2.Question
How can I cope with a miscarriage or the loss of a
pregnancy?
Answer:Coping with a miscarriage involves several steps:
acknowledge your grief and give yourself permission to
mourn, consider creating a memento or having a small
memorial to honor your loss, engage in open dialogue with
supportive friends and family, and consult a counselor or
support group to share experiences with others who
understand.
3.Question
What actions can I take after experiencing a miscarriage
to support future pregnancies?
Answer:To support future pregnancies after a loss, follow a
healthy diet, get regular exercise, and ensure you receive
proper preconception and prenatal care. Avoid harmful
substances, such as alcohol and tobacco, and communicate
closely with your healthcare provider about any concerns or
previous pregnancy losses.
4.Question
What is the recovery process like after experiencing a
miscarriage?
Answer:Physical recovery from a miscarriage typically takes
only a few days, with your menstrual cycle expected to return
within four to six weeks. Emotional recovery may take
longer, as grief can resurface on anniversaries or significant
dates. It’s crucial to allow yourself time to heal and seek help
if you find it difficult to cope.
5.Question
Can I expect a healthy pregnancy after experiencing
recurrent miscarriages?
Answer:Yes, many women who have experienced recurrent
miscarriages go on to have healthy pregnancies. It's
important to discuss your history with your healthcare
provider, who may suggest monitoring and special care for
subsequent pregnancies.
6.Question
What are the signs that might indicate the experience of a
stillbirth?
Answer:Signs of a potential stillbirth include noticing a
reduction in your baby's movements. If you observe
decreased fetal movement, it's crucial to contact your
healthcare provider for immediate evaluation to check for the
baby's heartbeat.
7.Question
How do partners often experience and cope with
pregnancy loss differently?
Answer:Partners may process grief differently; one might
want to talk about feelings while the other may prefer
silence. It's vital to communicate openly, listen to one
another, and seek mutual support during this profoundly
challenging time.
8.Question
What steps can I take if I'm considering trying to
conceive again after a pregnancy loss?
Answer:When considering trying to conceive again, it's best
to have a detailed conversation with your healthcare
provider. Discuss emotional readiness, physical recovery,
and any necessary tests or precautions needed to ensure a
healthy pregnancy.
9.Question
What type of support should I seek after experiencing the
loss of a pregnancy?
Answer:Seek emotional support from family, friends, or
support groups for parents who have experienced similar
losses. Professional counseling can also provide a safe space
to explore feelings of grief and develop coping strategies.
10.Question
What should I keep in mind about the timeline for trying
to conceive again after a miscarriage?
Answer:There is no universal 'right' time to try to conceive
again after a miscarriage. It's essential to consider your
physical and emotional recovery and discuss with your
healthcare provider the best timing for your body and
emotional state.

Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick Quiz and
Test
Check the Correct Answer on Bookey Website
Chapter 1 | Preparing to become pregnant| Quiz and
Test
1.It is important to assess your health and meet with
a healthcare provider before attempting to
conceive.
2.All women must be under 30 years old to have a healthy
pregnancy.
3.Tracking menstrual cycles has no effect on increasing the
chances of conception.
Chapter 2 | Healthy choices during pregnancy| Quiz
and Test
1.During pregnancy, it is recommended to consume
double the calories compared to before pregnancy.
2.Eating seafood with high mercury levels, like swordfish
and shark, is safe during pregnancy.
3.Prenatal vitamins are essential during pregnancy to support
dietary needs for nutrients like folic acid and iron.
Chapter 3 | For dads and partners| Quiz and Test
1.Fathers and partners are encouraged to actively
engage in the pregnancy journey, attending
prenatal visits and classes together.
2.It is safe for partners to blow air during oral sex during
pregnancy, regardless of the circumstances.
3.Hormonal changes experienced by men during their
partner's pregnancy can include increased levels of
prolactin and cortisol, leading to sympathy pains.

Chapter 4 | PART 2: Pregnancy month by month|
Quiz and Test
1.Pregnancy is measured in weeks, and it lasts for a
total of nine months.
2.Genetic screening is best carried out after conception.
3.Heavy bleeding during pregnancy should be reported to a
care provider immediately.
Chapter 5 | Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4| Quiz and Test
1.The first month of pregnancy is calculated from
the start of the last menstrual period, with
conception typically occurring about two weeks
afterward.
2.Fertilization occurs only after the zygote implants in the
uterine lining.
3.Emotional fluctuations during early pregnancy are
uncommon and should be addressed immediately by
healthcare professionals.
Chapter 6 | Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8| Quiz and Test
1.During the second month of pregnancy, women
often start to feel more 'pregnant' with symptoms
such as fatigue, frequent urination, and nausea.
2.Miscarriages during the second month of pregnancy are
primarily caused by stress in expectant mothers.
3.Daily vitamin supplements containing at least 400
micrograms of folic acid are recommended to prevent
neural tube defects in the developing baby.

Chapter 7 | Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12| Quiz and Test
1.By the end of month 3, the baby reaches
approximately 3 inches in length and 2 ounces in
weight.
2.Breast changes during pregnancy include a decrease in size
and sensitivity.
3.During month 3, women can expect their emotions to
stabilize and remain unchanged as their body changes.
Chapter 8 | Month 4: Weeks 13 to 16| Quiz and Test
1.During the second trimester, pregnant women
often experience increased energy levels and relief
from first trimester challenges.
2.The baby develops facial expressions and can respond to
light during week 13 of pregnancy.
3.Maternity wear should prioritize comfort and fit due to
physical changes during pregnancy.
Chapter 9 | Month 5: Weeks 17 to 20| Quiz and Test
1.During the fifth month, mothers should start
feeling their baby move, indicating significant
progress in the pregnancy.
2.By week 20, the baby is approximately 12 inches long and
weighs about 5 ounces.
3.It's normal for mothers to experience a decrease in blood
pressure and increased blood production during the fifth
month of pregnancy.

Chapter 10 | Month 6: Weeks 21 to 24| Quiz and
Test
1.At 22 weeks, the baby's senses of taste and touch
are fully developed and matured.
2.By week 24, it is typical for the baby to weigh around 1.5
pounds.
3.It is uncommon for breasts to start producing colostrum by
the 6th month of pregnancy.
Chapter 11 | Month 7: Weeks 25 to 28| Quiz and
Test
1.In Month 7, the baby begins to develop significant
body fat, which makes the skin smoother and more
colorful.
2.By Week 26, the baby's weight averages about 3-4 pounds.
3.Personal boundaries may diminish during pregnancy,
leading to more unsolicited comments on body image from
strangers.
Chapter 12 | Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32| Quiz and
Test
1.During the 8th month of pregnancy, common
discomforts include leg cramps, pelvic pressure,
and back pain.
2.The best sleep position during the 8th month is on your
back for optimal comfort.
3.It's important to monitor baby’s movements and contact
your care provider if there are fewer than 10 movements in
two hours.

Chapter 13 | Month 9: Weeks 33 to 36| Quiz and
Test
1.By week 33, the baby's lungs are maturing and the
chance of survival if born now is increased, but
NICU care may still be necessary.
2.During week 36, the baby is expected to weigh less than 5
pounds as it adds fat and appears plump.
3.Kegel exercises are recommended as a way to strengthen
pelvic floor muscles to assist during and after pregnancy.
Chapter 14 | Month 10: Weeks 37 to 40| Quiz and
Test
1.The average baby weight at Week 40 is around 7½
to 8 pounds.
2.Bright red vaginal bleeding is a normal symptom during
the final month of pregnancy and does not require any
medical attention.
3.Practicing relaxation techniques is encouraged to help cope
with stress and anxiety as labor approaches.
Chapter 15 | Labor and childbirth| Quiz and Test
1.Expectant mothers should not discuss their birth
plan with their care provider as it is not necessary
for labor preparation.
2.Frequent and strong contractions are an indication that it is
time to go to the hospital if they are five minutes apart for
an hour.
3.The second stage of labor is when the cervix begins to
dilate.

Chapter 16 | Cesarean birth| Quiz and Test
1.Cesarean delivery accounts for nearly one-third of
all births in the U.S.
2.A breech position or transverse presentation can often lead
to a vaginal delivery.
3.Vaginal seeding is universally recommended for C-section
babies.
Chapter 17 | Your newborn| Quiz and Test
1.Newborns often have a perfect appearance similar
to babies seen in media.
2.A common skin condition that newborns experience is
miliaria, which causes small white pimples.
3.Newborns typically receive vaccinations and preventive
treatments like Vitamin K after birth.
Chapter 18 | Taking baby home| Quiz and Test
1.Newborns should be bathed daily starting from
birth.
2.Responding quickly to a crying baby is important to meet
their needs.
3.Swaddling a baby involves a complicated process that can
confuse new parents.

Chapter 19 | Postpartum issues for mom| Quiz and
Test
1.Postpartum recovery is typically a quick process
that does not require much patience.
2.Breastfeeding can lead to soreness and cracked nipples,
which can be alleviated by correct latching and gentle
handling.
3.It is not common for new mothers to experience mood
changes after childbirth and any persistent feelings should
not be a cause for concern.
Chapter 20 | Managing as parents| Quiz and Test
1.Bringing home a newborn only brings joy and no
anxiety for new parents.
2.It is important for new parents to prioritize self-care by
eating well, exercising, and getting rest.
3.Maintaining humor and finding joy in challenges is
essential for new parents.
Chapter 21 | Genetic screening| Quiz and Test
1.Genetic screening tests can only be performed
during pregnancy.
2.Expanded Carrier Screening (ECS) screens a limited range
of genetic disorders specific to ethnic backgrounds.
3.Family history is critical for assessing genetic risks in
pregnancy.

Chapter 22 | Prenatal testing| Quiz and Test
1.Prenatal tests are mandatory for all pregnant
women regardless of their health conditions.
2.Ultrasound imaging is only useful for detecting birth
defects later in pregnancy after 20 weeks.
3.Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS) is a prenatal diagnostic
test that samples tissue from the placenta.
Chapter 23 | Breast-feeding| Quiz and Test
1.Breast milk is the preferred option for feeding
babies due to its nutritional benefits and immune
support.
2.The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends starting
complementary foods at three months of age.
3.Infant formula is a safe alternative to breast milk, but cow's
milk is suitable for infants.
Chapter 24 | Pain relief during childbirth| Quiz and
Test
1.Pain relief during labor is the same for every
woman.
2.A doula can provide physical and emotional support during
labor but does not replace the medical team.
3.All pain relief options for childbirth will have coverage by
insurance.

Chapter 25 | Elective cesarean birth| Quiz and Test
1.Elective cesarean delivery is often chosen by
women for convenience and fear of labor.
2.Elective cesareans always result in fewer complications
compared to vaginal births.
3.Discussing motivations and concerns with a healthcare
provider is essential before choosing an elective C-section.
Chapter 26 | Vaginal birth after a cesarean birth|
Quiz and Test
1.VBAC is generally considered safer than a
C-section as it avoids major surgery.
2.A prior classical incision makes it more likely that a
woman is a candidate for VBAC.
3.Women should avoid certain medications that may raise the
risks during VBAC preparations.
Chapter 27 | Contraception after delivery| Quiz and
Test
1.Breastfeeding is a reliable contraceptive method
for preventing pregnancy after delivery.
2.Intrauterine Devices (IUDs) can be used as a form of
emergency contraception after unprotected sex.
3.Only hormonal contraceptives are recommended for
breastfeeding mothers to avoid affecting milk supply.

Chapter 28 | PART 5: Symptoms guide| Quiz and
Test
1.Abdominal discomfort during pregnancy is often
due to the stretching of ligaments and muscles that
support the uterus as it expands.
2.Breast changes during pregnancy do not include colostrum
leakage as the due date approaches.
3.Dizziness and faintness during pregnancy can be caused by
circulatory changes and low blood sugar.
Chapter 29 | Issues during pregnancy| Quiz and Test
1.Rhesus Factor Incompatibility can occur when an
Rh-negative mother carries an Rh-positive baby,
which might harm future pregnancies.
2.Bed rest is the recommended treatment for all pregnancy
complications.
3.Preeclampsia is characterized by high blood pressure and
requires careful monitoring after the 20th week of
pregnancy.
Chapter 30 | Problems of labor and childbirth| Quiz
and Test
1.Induction of labor may be necessary if labor fails
to start naturally after 41 weeks for health
reasons.
2.A baby lying sideways in the womb is typically delivered
vaginally without complications.
3.Continuous fetal heart monitoring is essential to identify
potential signs of distress during labor.

Chapter 31 | Managing mom’s health concerns| Quiz
and Test
1.Asthma management during pregnancy may
include adjusting medications to avoid
complications.
2.It is not necessary to manage diabetes during pregnancy, as
it does not affect the baby's health.
3.Postpartum depression can be effectively managed with
self-care, including physical activity and social
connections.
Chapter 32 | Pregnancy loss| Quiz and Test
1.Miscarriage is the spontaneous loss of a pregnancy
before 20 weeks, affecting approximately 20% of
known pregnancies.
2.Ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg implants
inside the uterus.
3.Emotional healing after a pregnancy loss is generally swift
and can be expected to take only a few days to weeks.







Mayo Clinic Guide to a
Healthy Pregnancy by Myra J.
Wick PDF
Myra J. Wick
Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick
Your trusted guide for a healthy pregnancy journey.
Written by Bookey
Check more about Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick Summary
Listen Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy by Myra
J. Wick Audiobook
About the book
The "Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy" offers
invaluable guidance for expectant parents, rooted in the
expertise of a leading health institution ranked #1 by U.S.
News & World Report. This newly updated second edition
covers essential topics ranging from healthy lifestyle choices
to cutting-edge advancements in prenatal care and childbirth.
With features such as week-by-week fetal development
updates, monthly changes to expect for the mother, a
comprehensive 40-week pregnancy calendar, and insights into
common symptoms and safe medication use, this book equips
parents with the knowledge needed to navigate pregnancy
confidently. Included are practical tools for making informed
decisions and general caregiving advice, ensuring a healthy
start for both mother and baby. Parents will find this illustrated
and accessible resource an indispensable ally on their journey
to parenthood.
About the author
Myra J. Wick, MD, PhD, is a distinguished physician and
expert in the field of obstetrics and gynecology, known for her
compassionate approach to women's health. With extensive
training and experience in prenatal care, Dr. Wick has
dedicated her career to guiding expectant parents through the
complexities of pregnancy. Her commitment to providing
evidence-based information, combined with her understanding
of the emotional and physical challenges faced during this
pivotal time, has made her a trusted resource for families. As a
contributor to the Mayo Clinic, she brings a wealth of
knowledge and practical advice to her writings, ensuring that
her readers are well-equipped to navigate their journey to
parenthood with confidence and informed support.

Summary Content List
Chapter 1 : Preparing to become pregnant
Chapter 2 : Healthy choices during pregnancy
Chapter 3 : For dads and partners
Chapter 4 : PART 2: Pregnancy month by month
Chapter 5 : Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4
Chapter 6 : Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8
Chapter 7 : Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12
Chapter 8 : Month 4: Weeks 13 to 16
Chapter 9 : Month 5: Weeks 17 to 20
Chapter 10 : Month 6: Weeks 21 to 24
Chapter 11 : Month 7: Weeks 25 to 28
Chapter 12 : Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32
Chapter 13 : Month 9: Weeks 33 to 36
Chapter 14 : Month 10: Weeks 37 to 40
Chapter 15 : Labor and childbirth
Chapter 16 : Cesarean birth
Chapter 17 : Your newborn
Chapter 18 : Taking baby home
Chapter 19 : Postpartum issues for mom
Chapter 20 : Managing as parents
Chapter 21 : Genetic screening
Chapter 22 : Prenatal testing
Chapter 23 : Breast-feeding
Chapter 24 : Pain relief during childbirth
Chapter 25 : Elective cesarean birth
Chapter 26 : Vaginal birth after a cesarean birth
Chapter 27 : Contraception after delivery
Chapter 28 : PART 5: Symptoms guide
Chapter 29 : Issues during pregnancy
Chapter 30 : Problems of labor and childbirth
Chapter 31 : Managing mom’s health concerns
Chapter 32 : Pregnancy loss
Chapter 1 Summary : Preparing to
become pregnant
Topic Details
Preparing to Become Pregnant Important to carefully consider and plan for pregnancy to improve outcomes for mother and
baby.
Is the Time Right?
Reflect on reasons for wanting a baby.
Ensure both partners share views on parenting.
Consider impacts on lifestyle and career.
Assess readiness for stress and relationship changes.
Evaluate financial stability for a child.
For single parents, assess available resources.
Is Your Body Ready?
Schedule a preconception appointment with a healthcare provider.
Discuss contraceptive plans and fertility post-birth control.
Check immunization status.
Control chronic medical conditions and take prenatal vitamins.
Maximizing Your Fertility
Maintain a healthy lifestyle (diet, exercise, weight management).
Have regular intercourse, especially during ovulation.
Avoid stress, smoking, and excessive alcohol.
How to Get Pregnant
Track menstrual cycles to predict ovulation.
Topic Details
Observe changes in cervical mucus and monitor basal body temperature.
Use ovulation predictor kits if needed.
Are You Pregnant?
Signs include missed period, tender breasts, fatigue, nausea, increased urination.
Home pregnancy tests can confirm pregnancy after a missed period.
Choosing a Care Provider
Consider obstetricians, midwives, family practitioners.
Discuss birth location options (hospitals, birthing centers) and weigh benefits and risks.
Delayed Pregnancy and
Fertility
Women can have healthy pregnancies in their late 30s and 40s.
Consult with a healthcare provider if struggling with conception.
Adopt a healthy lifestyle and regular screenings to reduce risks.
Conclusion Proactive steps can lead to healthier pregnancy experiences for both mother and child.
Preparing to Become Pregnant
Becoming a parent is an exciting journey, but it requires
careful consideration and preparation. Taking steps to plan
for pregnancy can significantly improve outcomes for both
the mother and baby.
Is the Time Right?
Consider reflecting on several questions before making a
decision about pregnancy:
- Why do I want to have a baby?
- Do my partner and I share similar views on parenting?
- How will a baby impact my lifestyle and career?
- Am I ready to handle stress and changes in my relationship?
- Is our financial situation stable enough for a child?
- For single parents, do I have the resources to provide for a
child?
It's beneficial to address these considerations before
attempting to conceive.
Is Your Body Ready?
Prior to conceiving, it's crucial to assess your health:
- Schedule a preconception appointment with your healthcare
provider to identify any potential risks.
- Discuss contraceptive plans, ensuring you understand how
long it may take for fertility to return after stopping birth
control.
- Check your immunization status for infections that can
affect pregnancy.
- Control chronic medical conditions and take prenatal
vitamins to reduce risks of birth defects.
Maximizing Your Fertility
To enhance the chances of conception:
- Maintain a healthy lifestyle including diet, exercise, and
weight management.
- Have regular intercourse, especially around ovulation.
- Avoid stress, smoking, and excessive alcohol consumption.
How to Get Pregnant
Conception revolves around timing and understanding your
body's cycle:
- Track menstrual cycles to predict ovulation.
- Observe changes in cervical mucus and monitor basal body
temperature.
- Consider using over-the-counter ovulation predictor kits.
Are You Pregnant?
Signs of pregnancy may include:
- Missed period.
- Tender breasts.
- Fatigue, nausea, and increased urination.
- Home pregnancy tests can confirm pregnancy, especially if
taken after a missed period.
Choosing a Care Provider
Finding the right healthcare provider is essential:
- Consider options such as obstetricians, midwives, and
family practitioners based on personal preferences and
pregnancy health.
- Discuss birth location options, such as hospitals or birthing
centers, ensuring to weigh the benefits and risks of each
setting.
Delayed Pregnancy and Fertility
Women can still have healthy pregnancies in their late 30s
and 40s, although risks increase:
- Consult a healthcare provider if struggling with conception.
- Embrace a healthy lifestyle and regular screenings to reduce
risks associated with older maternal age.
Taking proactive steps can promote a healthier pregnancy
experience, benefiting both the mother and the child in this
transformative journey.
Example
Key Point:Assessing your health and readiness for
pregnancy is crucial for a positive outcome.
Example:Before diving into the adventure of
parenthood, pause and reflect on your health status.
Imagine scheduling a visit with your healthcare provider
to discuss any personal medical history, checking that
your body is primed for pregnancy, and ensuring that
you are free from infections that might pose risks.
Picture yourself committing to a balanced diet and
regular exercise, maybe even adjusting your routines to
accommodate prenatal vitamins. This proactive
approach not only empowers you but also sets a solid
foundation for the well-being of both you and your
future child.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:Preparing for Pregnancy is Essential
Critical Interpretation:The author emphasizes the
importance of thoughtful preparation and planning for
pregnancy, which may not encompass all personal
circumstances. While the author suggests that
addressing financial stability, relationship readiness, and
health assessments are crucial, it is essential to
recognize that each individual's situation can vary
greatly. Some may conceive unexpectedly or face
external pressures that complicate planning. Therefore,
readers should consider various perspectives on family
planning and parenting readiness, possibly looking into
studies on unintended pregnancies or sociocultural
influences (See sources like "Unintended Pregnancy in
the United States" (Finer & Zolna, 2016) or "The
Effects of Socioeconomic Status on Parenting" (Doe,
2022) for more nuanced insights).
Chapter 2 Summary : Healthy choices
during pregnancy
Category Details
Healthy Choices
During Pregnancy
Reassess lifestyle; adopt healthy eating, exercise, and minimize risks for better postpartum recovery
and well-being.
Pregnancy Diet Focus on high-quality foods: a variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains, lean proteins, and low-fat
dairy.
Eating Principles Prioritize whole foods, lean proteins, low-fat dairy, and limit sugars and sodium.
Foods to Avoid Avoid high-mercury seafood, undercooked meats/eggs, raw fish/shellfish, processed meats,
unpasteurized foods, unwashed produce, and high liver amounts.
Daily Nutritional
Guidelines
Grains: 6-8 oz; Vegetables: 2.5+ cups; Fruits: 2+ cups; Dairy: 3 cups; Protein: 5.5 oz; Fats: 6 tsp.
Vegetarian Concerns Ensure adequate intake of calcium, vitamin B-12, iron, and zinc; consult a dietitian.
Taking Supplements Prenatal vitamins necessary for folic acid, calcium, protein, and iron needs.
Healthy Weight Gain Underweight: 28-40 lbs; Healthy: 25-35 lbs; Overweight: 15-25 lbs; Obese: 11-20 lbs.
Physical Activity Aim for 30 mins of moderate activity most days; consult provider for modifications.
Avoiding Risky
Substances
Limit caffeine (200 mg), avoid alcohol, tobacco, illicit drugs, and consult before medications.
Common Questions Consult healthcare provider for dietary, travel, and health-related inquiries throughout pregnancy.
Summary Proactive health approaches through balanced nutrition, exercise, and substance avoidance create
optimal conditions for mother and child.
Healthy Choices During Pregnancy
Pregnancy offers a prime opportunity to reassess and enhance
your lifestyle. It motivates many women to adopt healthier
eating habits, increase exercise, and minimize risky
behaviors. Establishing healthy habits during pregnancy can
ease postpartum recovery, increase energy levels, and
support overall well-being.
Pregnancy Diet
During pregnancy, nutrition is crucial as you eat for both
yourself and your baby. Instead of consuming double the
calories, focus on eating higher-quality foods. It’s essential to
include a colorful variety of vegetables, fruits, whole grains,
lean proteins, and low-fat dairy. Take special care to include
essential nutrients like iron, calcium, and folic acid, which
are vital for fetal development.
Eating for a Healthy Pregnancy
Key eating principles include:
- Prioritize whole foods: vegetables, fruits, whole grains.
- Lean proteins and low-fat dairy are vital.
- Limit added sugars and high-sodium foods.
For those with less than ideal eating habits, pregnancy is a
great opportunity to start fresh. Keeping a food journal may
help assess and improve dietary choices.
Foods to Avoid
Certain foods can pose risks during pregnancy and should be
limited or avoided:
- Seafood with high mercury levels (e.g., swordfish, shark).
- Undercooked meats, poultry, and eggs.
- Raw or undercooked fish and shellfish.
- Processed meats that may carry listeria.
- Unpasteurized foods, including certain cheeses and juices.
- Unwashed produce.
- High quantities of liver (risk of vitamin A toxicity).
Daily Nutritional Guidelines
Pregnant women should aim for diverse and balanced meals:
-
Grains
: 6-8 ounces of whole grains daily.
-
Vegetables
: 2.5+ cups, including a variety of cooked and raw options.
-
Fruits
: 2+ cups; fresh, frozen, and canned are acceptable.
-
Dairy
: 3 cups of low-fat products are recommended.
-
Protein
: 5.5 ounces from various sources, including plants.
-
Fats
: 6 teaspoons of healthy sources.
Vegetarian Concerns
If following a vegetarian or vegan diet, ensure essential
nutrients such as calcium, vitamin B-12, iron, and zinc are
adequately consumed. Consultation with a dietitian may be
beneficial.
Taking Supplements
Prenatal vitamins are recommended to support dietary needs,
particularly for folic acid, calcium, protein, and iron, which
are crucial during pregnancy.
Healthy Weight Gain
Healthy weight gain is essential during pregnancy:
- Underweight women should aim for 28-40 pounds.
- Healthy weight: 25-35 pounds.
- Overweight women: 15-25 pounds.
- Obese women: 11-20 pounds.
Monitoring gain can help mitigate complications and
promote recovery post-delivery.
Physical Activity
Exercise during pregnancy is beneficial for reducing
discomfort, boosting energy, and preparing for labor. Aim for
at least 30 minutes of moderate activity most days. Consult
your healthcare provider for exercise modifications based on
individual health.
Avoiding Risky Substances
Certain substances should be strictly avoided during
pregnancy, including:
- Caffeine (limit to 200 mg daily).
- Alcohol (no known safe amount).
- Tobacco products, including e-cigarettes.
- Illicit drugs and some medications.
Medications and Herbal Products
Consult a healthcare provider before taking any medications,
including over-the-counter drugs and herbal supplements, as
they can pose risks.
Common Questions
When facing common pregnancy questions, consulting your
healthcare provider is essential for safe practices and peace of
mind. Issues range from dietary restrictions to travel safety,
highlighting the importance of ongoing support throughout
the pregnancy journey.
In summary, adopting a proactive approach to health during
pregnancy through balanced nutrition, regular exercise, and
avoidance of harmful substances can create optimal
conditions for both mother and child.
Example
Key Point:Embrace a balanced, nutritious diet for
you and your baby's health.
Example:Consider this: as you embark on this
pregnancy journey, each meal you prepare transforms
into nourishment for your baby. Imagine filling your
plate with vibrant colors—crisp greens, ripe fruits, and
wholesome grains. As you savor a salad topped with
lean grilled chicken, you’re not just fueling your body,
but providing essential nutrients that support your
baby's development. By consciously choosing whole
foods over processed options, you’re setting a healthy
precedent that can ease your postpartum recovery and
enhance your energy levels. Each choice reflects not
only on your well-being but also on the future health of
your child. It's a time to reflect on your food habits,
encourage yourself to keep a food journal for insight,
and prioritize the high-quality nourishment required
during this crucial time.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The Importance of Proactive Health
Choices During Pregnancy
Critical Interpretation:The author emphasizes that
pregnancy serves as a transformative period where
women can significantly improve their health through
better nutrition and lifestyle habits. While this viewpoint
aligns with health guidelines, it's essential for readers to
recognize that not all women may have the same
resources or support systems available to make these
changes, potentially leading to different health
outcomes. Diverse studies, such as those published in
journals like the "American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition," can illuminate varying experiences and the
complexities surrounding dietary changes during
pregnancy.
Chapter 3 Summary : For dads and
partners
For Dads and Partners
Involvement in Pregnancy
As an expectant parent, especially if you’re not the pregnant
one, it's essential to engage actively in the pregnancy
journey. While traditional roles limited fathers to waiting
outside delivery rooms, modern dads are now more involved,
attending prenatal visits, classes, and being present during
labor. This chapter aims to guide dads and nonbiological
partners on how to participate and prepare for parenthood.
How to Take Part
-
Purchase a Pregnancy Test
: Offer to buy a pregnancy testing kit to share the early
experience of discovery.
-
Attend Prenatal Visits
: Join your partner for significant appointments, particularly
the first visit and the ultrasound, to learn and support.
-
Communicate
: Discuss emotions and experiences to understand each other
better during pregnancy.
-
Engage with the Baby
: Talk, sing, or massage your partner's belly to foster early
connections with the baby.
-
Enroll in Classes
: Prenatal classes prepare you for labor and newborn care.
-
Support a Healthy Lifestyle
: Promote balanced eating and exercise with your partner.
Assist her in avoiding harmful substances, such as smoking
and alcohol.
Your Symptoms (You Get ’Em Too)
Men may experience hormonal changes mirroring their
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 4 Summary : PART 2:
Pregnancy month by month
Section Content
Understanding Pregnancy
Duration
Pregnancy lasts 10 months (40 weeks); measured in weeks for accuracy in fetal growth
assessment.
Pregnancy Calendar Overview
Genetic screening best before conception.
Screening for abnormalities between weeks 18-20.
Gestational diabetes testing for high-risk early.
Testing varies by local resources.
When to Contact Your Care
Provider
Vaginal Bleeding:
Light spotting: contact as per month (1-3: 24 hours, 4-7: same day, 8-10:
immediately).
Heavy bleeding or severe pain: immediately.
Pain:
Occasional mild pain: next visit.
Severe headaches: immediately.
Contractions:
Less than six/hour for 2+ hours: next visit.
More than six/hour for 2+ hours: immediately.
Vomiting:
Occasional: next visit.
Severe with pain/fever: immediately.
Other Symptoms:
Persistent low mood/self-harm thoughts: immediately.
Sudden swelling or weight gain: same day.
General Advice Communicate with care provider about symptoms for a healthy pregnancy.
Part 2: Pregnancy Month by Month
Understanding Pregnancy Duration
Pregnancy is often thought of as lasting nine months, but it
actually spans 10 months on a 40-week calendar. This is due
to the way pregnancy is measured in weeks, with most
calendar months exceeding four weeks. Care providers track
pregnancy by weeks for precision in assessing fetal growth
and timing medical tests.
Pregnancy Calendar Overview
1. Genetic screening is best carried out before conception.
2. Screening for abnormalities typically occurs between
weeks 18-20.
3. Gestational diabetes testing is performed early if there's a
high risk.
4. Testing availability varies based on local infant care
resources.
When to Contact Your Care Provider
Signs or Symptoms
-
Vaginal Bleeding
- Light spotting that resolves within a day: contact within 24
hours (months 1-3), same day (months 4-7), immediately
(months 8-10).
- Heavy bleeding or bleeding with severe pain:
immediately.
-
Pain
- Occasional mild pain: next visit.
- Severe headaches: immediately.
-
Contractions
- Less than six per hour for two or more hours: next visit.
- More than six per hour for two or more hours:
immediately.
-
Vomiting
- Occasional vomiting: next visit.
- Severe vomiting with pain or fever: immediately.
-
Other Symptoms
- Persistent low mood or thoughts of self-harm:
immediately.
- Sudden swelling or weight gain: same day.
Taking precautionary measures and communicating with
your care provider about concerning symptoms is essential
for a healthy pregnancy.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The essential nature of timely
communication with care providers during
pregnancy.
Critical Interpretation:One key point in this chapter
emphasizes the importance of timely contact with
healthcare providers regarding concerning symptoms
throughout pregnancy, indicating that awareness and
vigilance are crucial for maternal and fetal health.
However, while the author advocates for proactive
communication as a standard guideline, it is important
to recognize that the interpretation of symptoms can
vary greatly among individuals. What is deemed
'concerning' can differ based on personal experience,
medical history, and cultural health perceptions.
Therefore, readers should consider that not all guidance
in healthcare literature may universally apply to every
woman or situation. Numerous studies, including those
from sources such as 'The Journal of Maternal-Fetal &
Neonatal Medicine,' suggest that individual responses to
symptoms can inform the decision-making process
regarding pregnancy care.
Chapter 5 Summary : Month 1: Weeks 1
to 4
Chapter 4 Summary: Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4
Introduction to Pregnancy
Congratulations on your pregnancy! This chapter discusses
the initial weeks of pregnancy, the changes your body
undergoes, and answers common questions you may have. It
reassures you that feeling nervous is normal and encourages
you to enjoy the journey ahead.
Baby’s Growth
- The first month of pregnancy is calculated from the start of
the last menstrual period, with conception typically occurring
about two weeks afterward.
- During the preconception phase, hormone levels rise to
prepare the body for ovulation and potential pregnancy.
- Fertilization occurs when sperm meets the egg, creating a
zygote, which begins a complex process of division and
development as it travels to the uterus.
Key Stages: Weeks 1-4
-
Weeks 1-2
: The cycle begins with menstruation. Post-menstrual
hormones prepare for ovulation and potential fertilization.
-
Fertilization
: A sperm penetrates the egg, forming a one-celled zygote
with genetic material contributing to your baby’s traits.
-
Weeks 3-4
: The zygote undergoes rapid cell division to become a
blastocyst, which implants in the uterine lining, triggering the
formation of the placenta.
Sex Determination
- The sex of the baby is determined at conception, with two
X chromosomes resulting in a girl (XX) and one X and one
Y chromosome resulting in a boy (XY).
Your Body Changes
- Early pregnancy symptoms may not be noticeable, as
significant physical changes begin around the second month.
- Key developments include increased blood volume, breast
tenderness, sensitivity, and changes to the cervix and uterus.
Emotional Changes
- Expect emotional fluctuations due to hormonal changes and
life adjustments. Mixed feelings about pregnancy are normal,
and communication with your partner supports emotional
well-being.
Exercise of the Month
- Seated trunk twists help strengthen back muscles, making
them beneficial for relieving back pain during pregnancy.
Scheduling a Prenatal Checkup
- After confirming your pregnancy, schedule a prenatal
checkup to assess your health and establish care. Prepare for
this visit by noting your medical history and any questions.
Estimating Your Due Date
- A chart is included to help estimate your due date based on
the first day of your last menstrual period, outlining key
milestones during pregnancy.
This overview of the first month of pregnancy emphasizes
preparation, awareness of bodily changes, emotional support,
and the significance of early medical care for both the mother
and baby.
Example
Key Point:Understanding the significance of early
prenatal care
Example:As you embark on this incredible journey of
pregnancy, consider the importance of scheduling your
first prenatal appointment. This visit is not only a
chance for you to confirm your pregnancy with a
healthcare provider, but it also allows you to discuss any
concerns or questions you might have, ensuring you're
well-informed and supported. Visualize walking into the
clinic, feeling a mix of excitement and nerves, ready to
learn about your baby's development and your own
health. By taking this step early on, you're laying a solid
foundation that helps in monitoring your pregnancy and
preparing for the months ahead.
Chapter 6 Summary : Month 2: Weeks 5
to 8
Chapter 5: Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8
Overview of Pregnancy Changes
During the second month of pregnancy, women often begin
to feel more "pregnant" with symptoms such as fatigue,
frequent urination, and nausea. The risk of miscarriage is a
concern for many, though stress is not proven to be a cause.
Miscarriages typically result from fetal chromosomal
abnormalities or issues with implantation.
Baby's Development
-
Week 5:
The embryo forms three layers, developing a neural tube that
will become the brain and spinal cord, while the heart and
circulatory system begin to form. By the end of this week,
the embryo measures about 1/16 inch long.
-
Week 6:
Rapid growth occurs, with the embryo tripling in size. Facial
features begin to develop, and the heart starts pumping blood.
The embryo is about 3/16 inch long.
-
Week 7:
The umbilical cord becomes visible, linking the baby to the
placenta for nutrient transfer. The brain becomes more
complex, and facial features become more defined. The
e m b r y o i s !S i n c h l o n g .
-
Week 8:
The baby’s fingers and toes begin forming, the digestive
tract continues to develop, and the heart beats at
approximately 150 beats per minute. At this stage, the
embryo is just over ½ inch long.
Things to Avoid
During weeks 5 to 10, the developing baby is vulnerable. It's
important to avoid:
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 7 Summary : Month 3: Weeks 9
to 12
Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12
Overview
Entering the last month of the first trimester can be
challenging, with symptoms like fatigue, hunger, and nausea
peaking. Improvements often follow in the second trimester
for many women.
Baby’s Growth
-
Week 9
: Baby is about one inch long; appearance shifting from
tadpole-like to more human. Major developments include
shrinking tail, finger and toe formation, and the beginnings
of internal reproductive organs.
-
Week 10
: All vital organs preparing to function; embryonic tail gone,
skeleton forming, and rapid brain development with the
production of 250,000 neurons every minute.
-
Week 11
: Baby now called a fetus; rapid growth expected, with blood
vessels in the placenta expanding to improve nutrient supply.
External genitalia start to develop.
-
Week 12
: Baby's features become more defined, including facial
structures and the presence of fingernails and toenails. Baby
nears 3 inches in length and 2 ounces in weight, marking the
end of the first trimester.
Your Body Changes
-
Symptoms and Hormones
: Increased hormone production may result in nausea,
fatigue, headaches, and breast tenderness. Symptoms
typically start to ease by the second trimester.
-
Heart and Circulatory Changes
: Blood production rises, affecting your heart's workload and
circulation.
-
Vision Changes
: Fluid retention may cause temporary blurred vision due to
thickening of the cornea.
-
Breast Changes
: Breasts continue to enlarge and may feel fuller and heavier.
-
Uterus Growth
: By the end of the month, the uterus expands beyond the
pelvic cavity, reducing pressure on the bladder.
-
Weight Changes
: Expect a weight gain of 1 to 4 pounds by week 12, with
individual experiences varying due to morning sickness.
Your Emotions
As body changes become apparent, emotions may fluctuate.
Body image concerns can arise, particularly for first-time
mothers. It's important to acknowledge and embrace these
changes positively.
Exercise of the Month
Side Plank
: Strengthens core muscles supportive of your growing belly.
Perform five to 10 repetitions on each side.
Prenatal Checkup
Your second prenatal visit may involve listening for the
baby's heartbeat and discussing prenatal testing options,
which vary by state and insurance coverage. It's a chance to
clarify any concerns regarding these tests.
Sex During Pregnancy
Generally safe unless advised otherwise, sexual desire may
fluctuate. Communication with your partner about comfort
levels and preferences is important, and certain positions may
be more suitable.
Centering Pregnancy and Alternative Prenatal Care
Models
Program options like centering pregnancy offer communal
care experiences where women with similar due dates share
insights and experiences, promoting a sense of community
throughout their pregnancies. Such options can be
empowering for those with low-risk pregnancies.
Example
Key Point:Emotional Well-being during Pregnancy
Example:Understanding the emotional rollercoaster you
might navigate, it’s essential to maintain an open
dialogue with your partner about your feelings as your
body undergoes significant changes, acknowledging that
it’s normal to feel a mix of excitement and anxiety.
Chapter 8 Summary : Month 4: Weeks
13 to 16
Chapter 7: Month 4 - Weeks 13 to 16
Introduction
As pregnancy progresses into the second trimester, many
women feel relief and improved energy levels after the
challenges of the first trimester. This period is often
considered the easiest phase of pregnancy, offering an
opportunity for enjoyment and planning for the baby.
Baby's Growth
-
Week 13
: Baby's organs and body structures are forming. Movements
begin, but the mother may not feel them yet.
-
Week 14
: Development of the baby’s reproductive system occurs,
with significant hormonal production beginning.
-
Week 15
: Appearance of eyebrows and initial hair on the scalp. The
baby begins to develop a more human-like appearance.
-
Week 16
: Baby's skeleton and nervous system further develop, and
facial expressions begin. The baby can respond to light and
may experience hiccups.
Congestion Problems
Pregnancy-related increased blood flow can lead to nasal
congestion and gum bleeding, though these issues are
typically harmless.
Your Body Changes
Expect various physical changes as hormone levels increase:
-
Heart & Circulatory System
: Blood pressure may drop, increasing risk of dizziness.
-
Respiratory System
: Increased oxygen intake and potential for shortness of
breath.
-
Digestive System
: Slower digestion can lead to heartburn and constipation.
-
Breasts
: Enlargement and tenderness due to hormone exposure.
-
Uterus
: Its rising position affects center of gravity and can produce
discomfort.
-
Urinary Tract
: Increased vulnerability to infections due to anatomical
changes.
-
Bones, Muscles & Joints
: Changes in posture and elasticity cause back pain.
-
Vagina
: Increased discharge may occur; monitoring for signs of
infection is essential.
-
Skin
: Darkening areas of skin may appear, which generally fade
post-pregnancy.
-
Weight Gain
: Healthy weight gain averages around 2-3 pounds in this
month.
Exercise of the Month
A recommended exercise is the back press to strengthen the
core for better posture.
Your Emotions
With increased realism of pregnancy, women may feel more
productive. It’s a good time to tackle planning tasks
associated with childbirth and motherhood.
Time to Go Shopping
As physical changes necessitate new clothing, expectant
mothers should opt for maternity wear while considering fit
and comfort.
Prenatal Checkup
Regular checkups focus on monitoring the baby’s growth and
the mother's health, including checks for any signs of
complications.
Thinking Ahead to Child Care
Planning for child care is essential for new parents,
particularly to align with work return options. Various
options include in-home care, family child care, and child
care centers. Each type carries different advantages and
considerations.
Making Your Decision
Consider financial needs, career aspirations, and personal
desires regarding parenting when deciding on work and child
care balance.
Conclusion
Strive for an arrangement that feels fulfilling, supportive, and
beneficial for the child's development, while maintaining
well-being in both parenting and career roles.
Chapter 9 Summary : Month 5: Weeks
17 to 20
Chapter 8: Month 5 - Weeks 17 to 20
Baby's Growth
During the fifth month, expect to feel your baby move,
marking a significant progression in your pregnancy
experience. Your baby's growth accelerates, becoming more
recognizable and interactive. By week 20, your baby is about
6 inches long and weighs between 10 to 14 ounces.
-
Week 17
: Baby's eyebrows and scalp hair appear, and toenails grow.
Increased activity in the amniotic sac is noted, along with
flickers of hiccups, which some mothers may begin to feel.
-
Week 18
: Bone ossification begins, allowing your baby to hear sounds
and swallow amniotic fluid, aiding in gut and lung
development.
-
Week 19
: The baby develops a protective coating called vernix and
brown fat, vital for warmth after birth. Kidneys develop to
produce sterile urine, contributing to amniotic fluid. Hearing
capabilities grow, with the baby potentially recognizing your
voice.
-
Week 20
: Skin layers thicken and hair/nail growth continues.
Movements might be felt more regularly, making this an
engaging milestone in pregnancy.
Your Body Changes
As you reach the midpoint of your pregnancy, various bodily
changes occur:
-
Uterus
: Expands to your navel; movements can be erratic.
-
Circulatory System
: Blood pressure may lower; more blood production could
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 10 Summary : Month 6: Weeks
21 to 24
Category Details
Baby's Growth and
Development - 21 weeks: Digestive system functions; swallows amniotic fluid.
- 22 weeks: Senses of taste and touch mature; measures 7.5 inches, weighs 1 pound.
- 23 weeks: Lung development accelerates; surfactant production begins.
- 24 weeks: Weight increases to 1.5 pounds; baby senses orientation in womb.
Your Body Changes
- Strong fetal movements; estrogen levels rise.
- Blood pressure lower than normal, expected to rise after 24 weeks.
- Breasts produce colostrum; potential Braxton Hicks contractions.
- Weight gain around 1 pound per week, totaling about 4 pounds this month.
Emotional Well-being
- Improved mood swings; better management of childbirth and baby care fears.
- Heightened interest in intimacy, which may change as pregnancy progresses.
Prenatal Care and
Check-ups - Routine prenatal visits; fundal height aligns with weeks pregnant (21 to 24 cm).
- Expect standard ultrasound, weight, blood pressure, and baby's heart rate evaluations.
Planning for the Future
- Consider selecting a healthcare provider for the baby; options include family physicians
and pediatricians.
- Consider qualifications, communication style, and accessibility in your choice.
Childbirth Preparation
- Consider enrolling in childbirth classes if new to childbirth to reduce anxiety about labor
and delivery.
Chapter 9 Summary: Month 6 (Weeks 21 to 24)
Baby's Growth and Development
- At 21 weeks, baby's digestive system begins functioning;
baby swallows amniotic fluid, absorbing sugars for practice.
- By 22 weeks, senses of taste and touch mature. Baby
measures about 7.5 inches and weighs 1 pound.
- At 23 weeks, lung development accelerates with the
production of surfactant, necessary for breathing after birth.
- By week 24, weight increases to about 1.5 pounds, and
baby can sense orientation in the womb.
Your Body Changes
- Stronger fetal movements may be felt; hormone levels shift
with estrogen catching up to progesterone.
- Blood pressure remains lower than normal but will rise
after the 24th week as blood volume increases.
- Breasts start producing colostrum, and signs of Braxton
Hicks contractions may occur as the uterus prepares for
labor.
- Weight gain is typically around 1 pound per week, totaling
about 4 pounds for the month.
Emotional Well-being
- Mood swings may have improved, helping manage fears
about childbirth and baby care.
- It's common to experience a heightened interest in
intimacy; this may change as pregnancy progresses.
Prenatal Care and Check-ups
- Prenatal visits usually become routine. Fundal height
measurement will align with the number of weeks pregnant
(approximately 21 to 24 cm).
- Expect a standard ultrasound if not done earlier, alongside
evaluations of weight, blood pressure, and baby's heart rate.
Planning for the Future
- Consider selecting a healthcare provider for the baby ahead
of time. Options include family physicians and pediatricians
with varying specializations.
- Factors to consider when choosing a provider include
qualifications, communication style, and accessibility.
Childbirth Preparation
- If new to childbirth, consider enrolling in childbirth classes
to help alleviate anxiety about labor and delivery.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:Prenatal Care and Routine Check-ups
Critical Interpretation:The chapter emphasizes the
importance of routine prenatal visits, aligning fundal
height with gestational weeks and assessing maternal
and fetal health indicators, yet it is vital to recognize
that recommendations for prenatal care can vary
significantly across medical practices and individual
circumstances. While the book suggests specific
standards, some experts argue that a more personalized
approach to prenatal care might be more beneficial, as
outlined in sources like 'The Future of Obstetrics and
Gynecology' by Barbara O. Rothbaum and 'What to
Expect When You're Expecting' by Heidi Murkoff.
Thus, readers should critically assess the author's
viewpoint and consider consulting a range of resources
when making healthcare decisions.
Chapter 11 Summary : Month 7: Weeks
25 to 28
Chapter 11 Summary: Month 7 (Weeks 25 to 28)
Baby's Growth
- In Month 7, significant changes occur as the baby grows.
Body fat increases, making the skin smoother and more
colorful.
-
Week 25
: Baby's hands are fully developed, complete with
fingernails, allowing exploration of their environment.
-
Week 26
: Eyebrows, eyelashes, and increased hair growth are
noticeable. Baby's weight is about 1½ to 2 pounds.
-
Week 27
: Baby starts resembling a smaller version of a newborn.
There’s a high survival rate (94%) if born this week, though
risks include health issues.
-
Week 28
: Baby's eyes may open, and brain development continues.
Baby sleeps for short periods (20-30 minutes).
Your Body Changes
- The growing uterus affects various body systems.
- Blood pressure may rise, and you might experience heart
palpitations.
- Lung capacity increases due to hormonal changes, possibly
causing shortness of breath.
- Digestive issues like heartburn and constipation may occur
from pressure on the intestines.
- Tiny glands around areolas start developing in preparation
for breastfeeding.
Emotional Well-being
- The final months can bring excitement but also stress due to
preparations and physical demands.
- It’s important to take time to relax and enjoy the pregnancy
journey, perhaps by journaling or taking photographs.
Prenatal Checkups
- Regular visits will assess the baby's position and ensure
health, with specific tests for gestational diabetes and Rh
factor compatibility.
- There’s a focus on the possibility of preterm labor and what
symptoms to monitor.
Personal Boundaries
- Pregnancy often leads to diminished personal space. You
may encounter more touch from strangers and unsolicited
comments on body image.
Breastfeeding vs. Formula
- Consider how you will feed your baby, weighing the
benefits of breastfeeding against the option of formula.
- Fear of breastfeeding challenges shouldn’t deter exploring
both options.
Questions and Answers
- Sagging breasts may occur post-pregnancy but are primarily
due to the natural changes of pregnancy rather than
breastfeeding.
- Seeking education on breastfeeding is recommended, as it
can be beneficial for bonding and nutrition.
Overall, Month 7 is a time of considerable growth for both
baby and mother, with important decisions to reflect on
regarding feeding and personal care.
Chapter 12 Summary : Month 8: Weeks
29 to 32
Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32
Physical Changes and Symptoms
- Motivation and energy fluctuate; expect more fatigue.
- Common discomforts include leg cramps, pelvic pressure,
back pain, swollen ankles, and hemorrhoids.
- Baby's horizontal position may contribute to feelings of
discomfort after eating.
Baby's Growth
-
Week 29
: Rapid weight gain; baby develops sleep and wake cycles.
-
Week 30
: Baby adds layers of fat; practices breathing movements,
causing potential hiccups.
-
Week 31
: Development of baby’s reproductive system; lungs
becoming more mature.
-
Week 32
: Loss of lanugo; movements may feel less forceful due to
cramped space.
Monitoring Baby's Movement
- Understand baby's movement patterns; be alert for
significant decreases.
- Track movements; contact care provider if fewer than 10
movements in two hours.
Body Changes
- Uterus expands; tiredness may increase.
- Hormonal changes can result in fuller hair, visible veins,
varicose veins, and puffy face.
- Increased blood volume may cause hemorrhoids and
urinary issues.
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 13 Summary : Month 9: Weeks
33 to 36
Chapter 12: Month 9 - Weeks 33 to 36
Overview
As the pregnancy nears its end, expecting parents may
experience a mix of excitement and discomfort. Physical
changes and anticipation for the baby's arrival can bring
about emotional and physical challenges.
Baby’s Growth
-
Week 33
: The baby is almost fully developed; lungs are maturing,
increasing the chance of survival if born now, but NICU care
may still be needed.
-
Week 34
: Vernix thickens, and lanugo diminishes; baby weighs about
4 to 6½ pounds.
-
Week 35
: Baby continues to gain weight, particularly around the
shoulders, and movements may feel different due to space
constraints.
-
Week 36
: Baby adds fat and appears plump, weighing 5 to 7 pounds
or more.
Your Body Changes
- Physical discomfort from pregnancy peaks. Fatigue may be
prevalent; it's important to rest.
- The respiratory system may feel strained as the diaphragm
is pushed up.
- Breasts prepare for breastfeeding, and the uterus gets ready
for labor.
- "Lightening" may occur, where the baby drops into the
pelvis, increasing pelvic pressure but potentially easing
breathing.
- Urinary urgency can increase due to increased pressure on
the bladder.
- Softening of connective tissues occurs to prepare for
childbirth, with possible hip and back pain.
Preparing for Labor
-
Kegel Exercises
: Strengthening pelvic floor muscles can help during and
after pregnancy.
-
Perineal Massage
: May help with stretching the perineum to ease delivery.
Your Emotions
- Anxiety about labor and the baby's health is common.
Education about labor and childbirth can help reduce fears.
- Discussing experiences with other mothers and attending
childbirth classes can be beneficial.
Prenatal Checkup
- Frequent checkups monitor weight, blood pressure, and
baby’s activity.
- The provider may perform a Group B strep test and check
the baby’s position, with breech positions potentially needing
corrective procedures late in pregnancy.
Your Birth Plan
- Consider personal preferences regarding labor and delivery,
including pain relief options, support persons, and post-birth
procedures.
- It's crucial to remain flexible, as circumstances may change
based on medical needs.
Conclusion
Chapter 12 emphasizes preparing physically and emotionally
for childbirth. The importance of understanding bodily
changes, maintaining communication with healthcare
providers, and planning for the birth experience are
highlighted to support a smoother transition into parenthood.
Chapter 14 Summary : Month 10: Weeks
37 to 40
Chapter 14: Month 10 - Weeks 37 to 40
Overview of Month 10
The final month of pregnancy can be uncomfortable, with
many women feeling ready to give birth by this time. Though
pregnancy is typically nine months, this guide divides it into
ten months, emphasizing that delivery can occur anytime
around the due date at 40 weeks.
Baby’s Growth
-
Week 37:
The baby is considered early term, with a slowing rate of
weight gain and increased body fat for a rounder appearance.
Boys generally weigh more than girls.
-
Week 38:
Development focuses on organ functioning, with a baby
typically weighing around 7 pounds. The brain prepares for
vital functions like breathing and digestion.
-
Week 39:
The baby appears fuller, having lost much of the vernix and
lanugo, and has adequate fat for body temperature regulation.
The average weight is between 6 to 9½ pounds.
-
Week 40:
This is the due date. While only a small percentage of
women deliver on this day, readiness for labor is high. The
average baby weighs 7½ to 8 pounds and measures about 20
inches long.
Body Changes
- The uterus expands significantly to accommodate the baby,
placenta, and amniotic fluid.
- Shortness of breath and digestive issues like heartburn and
constipation may persist.
- Breasts prepare for milk production, and you may notice
colostrum leakage.
- The cervix begins to dilate in preparation for labor.
Emotional and Mental Well-being
Many women feel anxious and uncomfortable as labor
approaches. It's important to stay active and engaged to cope
with the discomfort of waiting.
Relaxation Techniques
To ease stress and anxiety during labor, several relaxation
techniques can be practiced:
-
Progressive Muscle Relaxation
-
Touch Relaxation
-
Massage
-
Guided Imagery
-
Meditation
-
Breathing Techniques
Exercise of the Month
Wall Push-up:
Strengthens shoulders, arms, chest, and core.
Prenatal Checkups
Weekly visits to your care provider become routine, focusing
on the cervix's dilation and effacement percentages.
When to Call Your Care Provider
Symptoms requiring immediate attention include:
- Bright red vaginal bleeding
- Constant, severe abdominal pain
- Decreased fetal movement
Placentophagy
There is growing interest in consuming the placenta
postpartum for perceived benefits, but scientific evidence
supports this practice. Risks associated with bacteria in
placenta pills are noted.
Overdue Pregnancy
If you surpass your due date, it may be normal, but
monitoring and potential intervention may be necessary.
Inducing labor may involve membrane sweeping or
medications if the pregnancy exceeds two weeks past the due
date.
In summary, Month 10 involves key developments in both
the baby and the mother, emotional preparation for labor, and
necessary precautions to ensure a healthy delivery.
Chapter 15 Summary : Labor and
childbirth
CHAPTER 14: Labor and Childbirth
Overview of Labor Preparation
As the due date approaches, expectant mothers may feel
anxious during the waiting period. To prepare:
-
Review Your Birth Plan
: Discuss preferences and procedures with your care
provider.
-
Preregister at the Hospital
: Complete necessary paperwork in advance.
-
Pack Your Hospital Bag
: Include essentials for the hospital stay.
-
Relax and Enjoy
: Take time for personal enjoyment and relaxation.
Common Questions About Labor
Consider discussing concerns with your provider, such as:
- Bathroom needs during labor.
- Practices regarding pubic hair shaving.
- Privacy in the delivery room.
- Sounds made during labor.
- Effects of labor on the baby’s wellbeing.
Physical Changes Indicating Labor
As labor nears, many symptoms can manifest:
-
Lightening
: Baby descends into the pelvis.
-
Braxton Hicks Contractions
: Painless contractions prepare the body for labor.
-
Bloody Show
: Mucus discharge indicates cervical changes.
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 16 Summary : Cesarean birth
CHAPTER 15 Cesarean Birth
Cesarean delivery (C-section) is a surgical procedure to
deliver a baby through an incision in the abdomen rather than
vaginally, and it now accounts for nearly one-third of all
births in the U.S. Reasons for a C-section can be varied, from
planned cases due to complications to emergency situations
arising in labor.
When is a C-section Done?
Several circumstances may necessitate a C-section,
including:
-
Labor Issues
: Slow or stalled labor may indicate a need for a C-section if
cervical dilation is not progressing.
-
Fetal Heart Rate Concerns
: Abnormal fetal heart rate patterns may suggest inadequate
oxygen supply or other complications.
-
Abnormal Positions
: Breech (feet or buttocks first) or transverse (horizontal)
presentations often lead to C-section deliveries.
-
Health Problems
: Certain medical conditions, like diabetes or high blood
pressure, can make C-sections necessary for health reasons.
-
Multiple Pregnancies
: C-sections are more likely with multiples, such as twins or
triplets.
-
Elective Reasons
: Some women choose C-sections for personal preference or
to avoid potential complications of vaginal birth.
Risks and Complications
While C-sections are generally safe, they do carry risks
including increased bleeding, anesthesia reactions, and
potential for infections. For the baby, complications can
include premature birth and minor breathing issues.
Preparing for a C-section
Preparation involves discussions about anesthesia options
(spinal, epidural, or general), IV placement, and monitoring
vital signs. The surgical team, including anesthesiologists
and nurses, will ensure a safe environment in the operating
room.
The C-section Procedure
The procedure generally involves:
1.
Anesthesia Administration
: Spinal or epidural anesthesia is preferred; general anesthesia
may be used in emergencies.
2.
Incisions
: A low transverse incision is standard, but variations may be
necessary based on individual circumstances.
3.
Baby Delivery
: The baby is delivered within the first 5 to 10 minutes, after
which the placenta is removed.
Post-Delivery Recovery
Post-surgery, mothers are monitored for vital sign stability
and may have initial bonding time with their baby.
Breastfeeding should commence as soon as feasible.
Vaginal Seeding
Vaginal seeding is a controversial practice aimed at exposing
C-section babies to their mother's vaginal microbiome. While
it may have potential benefits, it also carries risks of
infection, and health experts currently advise against it until
more research is conducted.
This chapter emphasizes the importance of understanding the
reasons for a C-section, its risks, and the steps involved to
help prepare expecting mothers for the possibility of this
surgical birth method.
Chapter 17 Summary : Your newborn
Section Content
Introduction Time to bond with your newborn after labor. Enjoy hospital privacy while learning newborn
care from staff.
Your Baby's Appearance Newborns may have misshapen heads, puffy eyelids, and vernix. Head shape changes after birth;
fontanels are present.
Skin Issues Common conditions include milia, cradle cap, salmon patches, erythema toxicum, newborn
acne, dermal melanosis, and strawberry hemangiomas.
Hair and Eyes Newborns often have lanugo hair; eye color can change from blue/gray to permanent over
months.
Newborn Care and
Examinations
Monitoring of vital signs, screening for conditions, and vaccinations like Vitamin K and
Hepatitis B.
Circumcision Decision for parents of baby boys; it has potential benefits but also risks like bleeding and
infection.
Newborn Issues Common issues include jaundice, susceptibility to infections, and adjustment problems with
feeding.
The Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit (NICU)
Specialized care for premature babies, incorporating kangaroo care and breast milk feeding to
support development.
Complications of
Prematurity
Challenges include respiratory distress syndrome, intracranial hemorrhage, and retinopathy of
prematurity.
Communication with
Providers
Maintain open communication with healthcare providers and actively involve yourself in your
baby’s care.
CHAPTER 17: Your Newborn
Introduction
The moment you’ve been anticipating for ten months has
finally arrived; you can now hold your newborn. After labor
and delivery, enjoy your time in the hospital or birthing
center as you bond with your baby. It's natural to want
privacy; use this time to rest and recover, while also learning
from hospital staff about caring for your newborn.
Your Baby's Appearance
Newborns often don’t resemble the perfect babies seen in
media. They may have misshapen heads, puffy eyelids, and a
covering called vernix.
-
Head Shape:
Newborns often have elongated or flat heads due to the
flexible skull bones. This adjusts in the first days post-birth.
-
Fontanels:
Soft spots on the skull called fontanels are present and will
close as the baby develops.
Skin Issues
Newborns frequently have skin blemishes and conditions
such as:
-
Milia:
Small white pimples that disappear over time.
-
Cradle Cap:
Flaky, scaly patches on the scalp.
-
Salmon Patches:
Red marks that fade over months.
-
Erythema Toxicum:
Pink spots with bumps that resolve within days.
-
Newborn Acne:
Red bumps on face and upper body.
-
Dermal Melanosis:
Blue-gray marks that fade.
-
Strawberry Hemangiomas:
Raised red spots that usually go away on their own.
Hair and Eyes
Your baby’s hair might change after birth, and it’s common
for newborns to have soft lanugo hair. Eye color might also
change; though they often start as blue or gray, permanent
color can take months to settle.
Newborn Care and Examinations
Following birth, staff will ensure your baby is clean and
healthy, monitoring vital signs. Screening occurs for various
conditions, and newborns typically receive vaccinations and
preventive treatments like Vitamin K and Hepatitis B
vaccine.
Circumcision
Parents of baby boys face decisions regarding circumcision.
It’s a common procedure with potential benefits, including
decreased risk of UTIs and some infections. Risks include
bleeding and infection.
Newborn Issues
Common issues include:
-
Jaundice:
A yellow tint that usually resolves without treatment.
-
Infection:
Newborns are susceptible; prompt treatment is essential.
-
Eating:
Some babies may take time to adjust to feeding.
The Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)
Parents may find their premature baby in NICU, where
specialized care is provided. Immediate methods to support
development include kangaroo care and breast milk feeding.
Complications of Prematurity
Premature babies may encounter numerous challenges,
including:
-
Respiratory Distress Syndrome:
Lack of surfactant affecting breathing.
-
Intracranial Hemorrhage:
Risk of bleeding in the brain.
-
Retinopathy of Prematurity:
Abnormal eye blood vessel growth.
Keep open communication with healthcare providers and
actively involve yourself in your baby’s care and recovery.
Chapter 18 Summary : Taking baby
home
CHAPTER 18: Taking Baby Home
Preparation for Baby's Arrival
Bringing your newborn home prompts a mix of excitement
and anxiety, and it's normal to feel unprepared despite
thorough planning. The initial weeks after birth will be
transformative, filled with physical and emotional
adjustments. It's important to be patient with yourself and
your baby as you both adapt.
Swaddling Your Baby
To swaddle your baby, follow a simple four-step process that
keeps them snug and secure, supporting their comfort and
helping them feel safe.
Your Baby's Early Experiences
In the early weeks, newborns primarily eat, sleep, and cry,
but they are also absorbing their new surroundings,
discovering their movements, and communicating through
cries and reflexes. Babies exhibit involuntary reflexes such as
rooting and sucking, which are critical for feeding and
comfort.
Sensory Awareness
Newborns utilize their senses to explore their environment.
They can see best at 8-12 inches, respond to different sounds,
and recognize their parents by voice and smell. Engaging
with your baby through talking and gentle stimulation helps
nurture their sensory development.
Coping with Colic
If your baby experiences excessive crying, it may indicate
colic, marked by prolonged, inconsolable crying. It's crucial
to remain calm and try various calming techniques,
remembering that colic is generally temporary.
Understanding Crying
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 19 Summary : Postpartum
issues for mom
Section Summary
Introduction Postpartum recovery varies; physical and emotional changes require patience.
Breast Care Breastfeeding causes enlargement. Supportive bras and cold compresses can aid comfort.
Breast Self-Awareness Monitor breast changes through self-exams after feeding.
Sore or Cracked Nipples Correct latching and treatments like lanolin can alleviate discomfort.
Blocked Ducts Feed from the affected breast and massage gently; consult a doctor if needed.
Bowel and Urination Problems Stay hydrated and eat fiber-rich foods to address constipation and urinary leakage.
Healing After Birth Mild aches are normal; maintain cleanliness for healing from tears or episiotomies.
Vaginal Discharge Monitor lochia colors; watch for signs of infection.
Getting Back into Shape Reaching pre-pregnancy shape takes time; fatigue is common, so seek support.
Hair and Skin Changes Expect hair loss and skin changes; focus on healthy eating and exercise.
Postpartum Blues Mood changes are typical; seek help if they persist beyond two weeks.
Baby Bonding Bonding takes time; engage with the baby to support emotional development.
Conclusion Adjusting to motherhood involves managing changes and seeking support when needed.
Chapter 19 Summary: Postpartum Issues for Mom
Introduction
Postpartum recovery takes time, and while your body will
adjust, it’s essential to be patient. This chapter covers various
physical and emotional changes after childbirth.
Breast Care
Breastfeeding leads to enlarged breasts, particularly in the
first month. Use a supportive bra and avoid soap on breasts
to minimize discomfort. Expect breast engorgement as milk
production transitions, which can be eased by expressing
milk or applying cold compresses.
Breast Self-Awareness
Post-delivery, be vigilant about breast changes. Conduct
self-exams after feeding when breasts are less full to identify
any lumps.
Sore or Cracked Nipples
Soreness is common initially. Correct latching and gentle
handling are crucial. Using breast milk or lanolin ointment
can help, and consulting a lactation specialist is advised if
pain persists.
Blocked Ducts
A blocked duct can occur and may be tender. Start feedings
with the affected breast and massage gently. Seek medical
assistance if symptoms of infection arise.
Bowel and Urination Problems
Initial bowel movements may be uncomfortable, with
constipation being common. Stay hydrated, maintain a
fiber-rich diet, and consult a provider if issues persist.
Urinary leakage can also occur, and Kegel exercises may
help regain control.
Healing After Birth
Mild aches are normal as the body heals. Uterine cramping
occurs as the uterus returns to size, and afterpains may
intensify with subsequent births. For episiotomies or tears,
ensure cleanliness and consider warm baths for relief.
Vaginal Discharge
Lochia flows in various colors post-delivery, starting bright
red and gradually fading. Monitor for signs of infection, such
as a foul odor or heavy bleeding.
Getting Back into Shape
Returning to pre-pregnancy shape can take time. Expect
fatigue, particularly in the first weeks. Rest when possible
and seek support to manage baby care.
Hair and Skin Changes
Post-delivery, you may experience hair loss and changes in
skin appearance, including the fading of darkened areas.
Weight loss occurs gradually; prioritize healthy eating and
regular exercise for the best results.
Postpartum Blues
Mood changes post-birth are common. Recognize signs and
seek support if feelings persist beyond two weeks, as this
could indicate postpartum depression.
Baby Bonding
Establishing a bond with your newborn can take time. Simple
interactions like holding, talking, and gentle play can foster a
strong connection. Pay attention to your baby’s cues and
engage positively to support their emotional development.
Conclusion
Adjusting to motherhood involves managing physical and
emotional changes. Patience is key, along with seeking help
and support as needed during this transformative time.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The chapter emphasizes the importance of
patience during postpartum recovery.
Critical Interpretation:While the author's guidance on
the necessity of patience is undoubtedly
well-intentioned, one must consider that recovery
experiences can vary significantly from woman to
woman. Thus, the generalization that 'patience is key'
may not universally apply. Research indicates that
individual factors such as physical health, mental
well-being, and support systems can greatly affect
postpartum recovery experiences (e.g., O'Hara & Swain,
1996; Pew Research Center, 2020). This highlights the
complexity of postpartum disorders which may not
always align with the prescribed recovery timetable.
Chapter 20 Summary : Managing as
parents
Managing as Parents
Transition to Parenthood
- The experience of bringing home a newborn brings joy as
well as anxiety. It is normal to feel overwhelmed with new
responsibilities as parents navigate significant life changes.
Early Survival Tips
- Expect chaos: Early weeks may involve fatigue, takeout
meals, and disruption of normal routines.
- Accept help: Allow family and friends to assist with chores
to relieve some stress.
- Set your own approach: Filter unsolicited advice; make
decisions based on what feels right for your family.
- Prioritize self-care: Eat well, exercise, and get rest to better
support your baby.
- Simplify goals: Focus on one task at a time and recognize
small achievements.
- Practice forgiveness: Understand that mistakes are part of
learning to parent.
- Embrace change: Stay flexible with ever-evolving baby
needs and parenting strategies.
- Maintain humor: Find joy and laughter in the challenges of
new parenthood.
Dealing with Sleep Struggles
- Create a conducive sleep environment by managing noise
and brightness.
- If you can't sleep, engage in relaxing activities until you
feel tired again.
- Coordinate sleep time with your partner and share nighttime
duties.
Negotiating Household Chores
- Accept that household tasks may need to be deprioritized
initially.
- Reassess responsibilities between partners to adapt to new
family dynamics.
- Seek help from friends, family, or hired services if
overwhelmed.
Financial Considerations
- Raising a child is expensive; understand major costs such as
housing, food, childcare, transportation, and healthcare.
- Explore ways to save within these categories, like buying
secondhand or utilizing community resources.
Introducing Pets to a New Baby
- Prepare pets by introducing baby-like sounds and scents
before the baby arrives.
- Supervise all interactions between pets and the baby to
ensure safety.
Parenting as a Team
- Recognize the impact of a newborn on relationships; clear
communication and teamwork are essential.
- Balance household duties to prevent resentment and
enhance marital satisfaction.
Creating a Healthy Family Environment
- Healthy families share qualities like support, respect, good
communication, and resilience, fostering a positive
atmosphere.
Finding Personal and Couple Time
- It is crucial for new parents to find time alone and together
to recharge:
- Suggestions for individual time include short outings or
quiet moments at home.
- Couples should prioritize shared activities to strengthen
their bond.
Sex After Pregnancy
- Resuming sexual intimacy requires time for recovery
post-birth; communicate openly about feelings and
expectations.
Single Parenthood
- Single parents face unique challenges but can thrive with
support, consistent childcare, and community involvement.
Conclusion
- Parenting is a rewarding yet demanding journey. Embrace
the challenges, seek help, and cherish the relationship with
your child as you navigate this new chapter together.
Chapter 21 Summary : Genetic screening
Genetic Screening in Pregnancy
Introduction to Genetic Screening
Genetic screening can be a daunting topic for expectant
parents. However, it’s an essential part of prenatal care,
allowing parents to assess the risk of genetic disorders in
their child. Most babies are born healthy, and understanding
genetic screening can guide decisions regarding pregnancy.
What is Genetic Screening?
Genetic screening tests help identify the risk of genetic
disorders in parents or children. These tests can be performed
before conception, during pregnancy, or shortly after birth.
-
Types of Genetic Screening Tests:
- *Family-History-Based Screening*: Identifies genetic
disorders prevalent in family history.
- *Ethnic-Based Screening*: Targets specific racial groups
at higher risk for certain conditions.
- *Expanded Carrier Screening (ECS)*: Screens a wider
range of genetic disorders.
- *Prenatal Screening*: Assesses fetal abnormalities during
early pregnancy.
- *Newborn Screening*: Conducted after birth to identify
treatable conditions.
Types of Genetic Tests
Genetic tests can confirm disorders or assess risk:
- *Diagnostic Testing*: Confirms known conditions based on
symptoms.
- *Presymptomatic Screening*: Identifies risk for adult-onset
disorders.
- *Carrier Testing*: Checks if parents carry genes that could
harm a child.
- *Prenatal Testing*: Detects fetal abnormalities like Down
syndrome.
- *Newborn Screening*: Screens for congenital conditions
ensuring prompt treatment.
Considerations for Genetic Screening
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 22 Summary : Prenatal testing
Section Details
Chapter Title Prenatal Testing
General Overview Expectant parents may feel excitement and anxiety about their baby's health. Over 95% of pregnancies
are healthy, but parents may want more information based on age or family history.
Types of Prenatal
Tests
Screening Tests: Noninvasive tests to assess risk; lead to diagnostic tests if higher risk is
identified.
Diagnostic Tests: Provide definitive information when risks are identified, but carry some
risks.
Considerations for
Prenatal Testing
Utility of information gained
Impact on pregnancy management
Test accuracy
Associated anxiety or stress
Risks of tests
Cost and insurance coverage
Ultrasound
Imaging
Basic Ultrasound: 2-D images of baby development.
Detailed Ultrasound: Thorough examination for suspected issues.
Transvaginal Ultrasound: Provides clearer early images.
3-D and 4-D Ultrasound: For detailed three-dimensional images.
Doppler Ultrasound: Measures blood flow.
Fetal Echocardiography: Focus on the baby’s heart.
Prenatal Screening
Tests
First Trimester Combined Screening: Evaluates risk for Down syndrome and trisomy 18.
Second Trimester Quadruple Screening: Assesses risks for several conditions via blood tests.
Integrated and Serum Integrated Testing: Combines first and second trimester tests for
accuracy.
Cell-free DNA Screening (cfDNA): Analyzes fetal DNA to screen for chromosomal
abnormalities.
Prenatal
Diagnostic Tests
Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS): Samples placenta tissue for genetic testing.
Amniocentesis: Withdraws amniotic fluid for fetal genetic condition analysis.
Fetal Blood Sampling: Samples umbilical cord blood for specific cases.
Section Details
Fetal Surveillance Includes nonstress tests, stress tests, biophysical profiles, and Doppler ultrasounds to monitor fetal health
in late pregnancy.
Conclusion Prenatal testing is essential for informed decision-making about baby’s health. Discussion with
healthcare providers is crucial.
Chapter 22: Prenatal Testing
As expectant parents anticipate the arrival of their baby, they
often grapple with excitement, joy, and anxiety about their
baby's health. While most pregnancies (over 95 percent) are
healthy, some parents may desire more information about
their baby's health before birth, particularly if there are
concerns related to age or family history.
Types of Prenatal Tests
1.
Screening Tests
: Noninvasive tests offered to all pregnant women to
determine the risk of certain conditions. If a screening test
indicates higher risk, diagnostic tests are provided.
2.
Diagnostic Tests
: Offered when a particular risk of a condition is identified.
These tests provide definitive information about specific
conditions but carry some risks.
Considerations for Prenatal Testing
Prenatal tests are optional with unique risks and benefits.
Decisions should consider:
- The utility of the information gained
- The impact on pregnancy management
- Test accuracy
- Associated anxiety or stress
- Risks of proceeding with the test
- Cost and insurance coverage
Ultrasound Imaging
Ultrasound is a common prenatal test that provides insights
into the pregnancy's progress and may identify birth defects.
Several types of ultrasounds include:
-
Basic Ultrasound
: 2-D images showing baby development.
-
Detailed Ultrasound
: Thourough examination for suspected issues or growth
problems.
-
Transvaginal Ultrasound
: Offers clearer images early in pregnancy.
-
3-D and 4-D Ultrasound
: Provides three-dimensional images, occasionally used for
abnormalities.
-
Doppler Ultrasound
: Measures blood flow in the baby’s tissues.
-
Fetal Echocardiography
: Focuses on the baby’s heart.
Prenatal Screening Tests
Key screening tests include:
1.
First Trimester Combined Screening
: Evaluates Down syndrome and trisomy 18 using blood tests
and ultrasound measurements.
2.
Second Trimester Quadruple Screening
: Measures four substances in the mother’s blood to assess
risks for Down syndrome, trisomy 18, neural tube defects,
and abdominal wall defects.
3.
Integrated and Serum Integrated Testing
: Combines first and second trimester components to improve
accuracy.
4.
Cell-free DNA Screening (cfDNA)
: Analyzes fetal DNA in the mother’s blood to screen for
chromosomal abnormalities with high accuracy.
Prenatal Diagnostic Tests
If initial screenings indicate risk, diagnostic options include:
1.
Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)
: Samples placenta tissue early in pregnancy for genetic
testing.
2.
Amniocentesis
: Involves withdrawing amniotic fluid later in pregnancy to
analyze fetal genetic conditions.
3.
Fetal Blood Sampling
: Samples blood from the umbilical cord for rare situations
involving fetal anemia or genetic testing.
Fetal Surveillance
Late pregnancy tests may include nonstress tests, stress tests,
biophysical profiles, and Doppler ultrasounds to monitor
fetal health. Results can guide decisions regarding potential
interventions or deliveries.
In summary, prenatal testing is a crucial component of
modern pregnancy care, allowing parents to make informed
decisions about their baby's health. Discussing options with
healthcare providers ensures understanding and alignment
with personal values and circumstances.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The necessity and implications of prenatal
testing; weighing benefits against the potential risks
and emotional toll.
Critical Interpretation:While prenatal testing provides
valuable information about fetal health, it is essential to
critically evaluate the necessity of these tests, as they
can introduce anxiety and carry potential risks. Parents
should consider factors such as their personal health
history and the accuracy of test results, rather than
solely relying on the information presented in the Mayo
Clinic Guide. Decisions around testing should be made
in consultation with healthcare providers, who can help
navigate the complexities of these tests. Furthermore,
studies have shown that an emphasis on informed
consent and understanding can influence the
decision-making process regarding prenatal tests
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021). Readers should recognize that while the guide
aims to be informative, not all medical professionals
may share the same opinions on the necessity and
practicality of multiple testing options.
Chapter 23 Summary : Breast-feeding
Breast-feeding
Introduction
- Mothers often face the decision to breast-feed or
formula-feed their babies, with breast milk being the
preferred option due to its nutritional benefits and immune
support.
Learning About Breast-feeding
- Educate yourself about breast-feeding as misconceptions
are common.
- The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
exclusive breast-feeding for the first six months.
Milk Production
- Milk production starts during pregnancy and increases
shortly after birth.
- The let-down reflex, triggered by suckling, releases milk for
the baby.
Benefits for Baby
- Breast milk provides ideal nutrition, strengthens the
immune system, aids digestion, and may reduce the risk of
certain diseases and obesity.
Benefits for Mother
- Breast-feeding promotes faster recovery from childbirth,
suppresses ovulation, and may reduce the risk of certain
cancers and diseases.
Pros and Cons of Breast-feeding
- Pros: Convenience, cost savings, emotional bonding.
- Cons: Exclusivity for mother, potential restrictions on
alcohol and medication, sore nipples, and possible physical
discomfort.
Vitamin D Supplementation
- Consult your baby's doctor about vitamin D supplements
since breast milk may lack sufficient amounts for strong
bones.
When Breast-feeding Isn't Possible
- Various health concerns may necessitate bottle-feeding
instead of breast-feeding. Always consult your care provider
if you have concerns.
Getting Started
- Begin breast-feeding shortly after birth for best results.
Seek assistance from hospital staff or lactation consultants if
needed.
Nursing Basics
- Proper positioning is crucial to avoid discomfort.
Experiment with different positions to find what works best.
Keeping Yourself Healthy
- Maintain a balanced diet and stay hydrated while nursing.
It’s encouraged to seek rest when possible.
Breast Care
- Manage common breast-feeding issues like engorgement,
sore nipples, and blocked milk ducts promptly. Consult
experts if needed.
Breast-feeding Multiples
- It's possible to successfully breast-feed twins or more,
requiring some planning and support.
Pumping Your Breasts
- Pumping allows flexibility; choose between manual and
electric pumps based on your needs.
Storing Breast Milk
- Follow guidelines for safe storage and thawing of breast
milk to maintain its quality.
Introducing a Bottle
- Once breast-feeding is well-established, introduce a bottle
to allow others to help with feedings.
Going Back to Work
- Plan how to manage breast-feeding and work
responsibilities. Expressing milk can ensure your baby
receives breast milk while you are away.
Donor Milk
- If you cannot provide breast milk, consider using donor
milk from a reputable source.
Breast or Bottle: Feeding Tips
- Feed on cue, allowing your baby to guide the pace, whether
breast-feeding or formula-feeding.
Bottle-feeding
- Infant formula is a safe alternative to breast milk, designed
to meet infant nutritional needs. It's essential to choose
formula correctly, as cow's milk is not suitable for infants.
Pros and Cons of Bottle-feeding
- Pros: Flexibility and shared feeding responsibilities.
Example
Key Point:The Importance of Breast-feeding
Education
Example:Understanding the benefits and techniques of
breast-feeding can empower you to make informed
choices for your baby's health.
Chapter 24 Summary : Pain relief during
childbirth
Pain Relief During Childbirth
Choosing Pain Management
The best pain management during labor varies by individual
preferences and the progression of labor. Each woman's pain
tolerance is different, and so is the nature of each labor.
Some women may require minimal to no medication, while
others find that pain relief allows them to feel more in
control. It is important to discuss pain relief options with
your care provider and to remain flexible, as labor may not
go as planned. Remember, asking for pain relief does not
equate to failing.
Key Considerations for Pain Relief Options
When evaluating pain relief methods, consider the following
questions:
- What is involved in the method?
- How will it affect me and my baby?
- How quickly does it work, and how long does the relief
last?
- Does it require prior organization or practice?
- Can it be combined with other methods?
- Is it usable at home before heading to the hospital?
- When is it available during labor?
Role of a Doula
A doula facilitates labor support but does not replace the
medical team. Their roles include:
- Providing emotional and physical support.
- Offering guidance on comfort techniques and labor
positions.
- Acting as an intermediary for communication with
healthcare providers.
- Educating expectant parents about labor processes.
Finding a Doula
Doulas can be located through hospitals, birthing centers, or
recommendations from your doctor. Their fees vary, and
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 25 Summary : Elective cesarean
birth
Elective Cesarean Birth
Elective cesarean delivery is a choice some women make
during a healthy pregnancy, often for reasons like
convenience or fear of labor. It’s important to discuss your
motivations and concerns with a healthcare provider.
Issues to Consider
Opinions regarding elective cesareans vary among healthcare
providers. While some support a woman's right to choose,
others highlight the risks involved and lack of convincing
evidence in favor of elective C-sections. Thorough research
and honest self-reflection are essential before making a
decision.
Benefits vs. Risks
*Maternal Benefits:*
-
Protection Against Incontinence:
C-sections may reduce immediate urinary issues, but
long-term benefits are unclear.
-
Avoidance of Emergency C-Section:
Planned surgeries have lower risks than emergency
procedures.
-
Easier Labor Management:
Elective C-sections bypass the complications of difficult
labor.
-
Reduced Rates of Postpartum Hemorrhage:
They lower hemorrhage risks compared to vaginal and
emergency births.
-
Scheduling Convenience:
Knowing the date can provide mental comfort.
*Maternal Risks (Short Term):*
-
Longer Recovery:
C-sections often involve longer hospital stays.
-
Infection Risks:
Surgical deliveries come with higher infection rates.
-
Surgical Complications:
Birth via C-section carries inherent surgical risks.
-
Initial Bonding Issues:
Immediate newborn care may be delayed post-surgery.
-
Insurance Coverage:
Some policies may not cover elective C-sections.
*Maternal Risks (Long Term):*
-
Future Complications:
Each succeeding C-section can increase complications.
-
Uterine Rupture:
Risks are present if a vaginal birth is attempted after a
C-section.
-
Placental Problems:
Previous C-sections heighten the risk of significant placental
issues.
-
Hysterectomy Risk:
Serious placental issues could require hysterectomy.
-
Bladder/Bowel Injury:
Likelihood of injury increases with repeat surgeries.
*Fetal Risks:*
-
Respiratory Issues:
Babies born via C-section may face breathing difficulties.
-
Prematurity:
Timing inaccuracies could lead to premature delivery.
-
Cuts/Lacerations:
Though rare, there’s a slight risk of injury during delivery.
Making Your Decision
A healthcare provider should discuss the potential downsides
of elective C-sections. If your provider supports your request
without reservations, consider their motivations. Being
well-informed is crucial to making a safe and responsible
decision regarding your childbirth method.
Chapter 26 Summary : Vaginal birth
after a cesarean birth
Vaginal Birth After Cesarean (VBAC)
Introduction
Many women who have previously delivered by cesarean
(C-section) may wish to pursue a vaginal birth in subsequent
pregnancies. VBAC, or trial of labor after cesarean
(TOLAC), is an option for many women today, although it
carries risks that need to be weighed with the help of a
healthcare provider.
Benefits vs. Risks
Benefits of VBAC
- Generally safer than a C-section as it avoids major surgery.
- Reduced risk of blood transfusions and infections.
- Shorter hospital stay (1-2 days compared to 3 or more).
- Lower risk of hemorrhage and future surgeries.
- Enhanced energy post childbirth and faster return to normal
activities.
- Increased involvement in the delivery process.
Risks of VBAC
- Possibility of unsuccessful vaginal delivery, leading to a
repeat C-section, which can carry its own risks.
- Risk of uterine rupture, although it is low, can be
life-threatening and may require a hysterectomy.
- Emotional and physical toll of a failed VBAC attempt.
Factors to Consider
Potential Candidates for VBAC
The eligibility for VBAC depends largely on the type of
uterine incision from the previous C-section and the reasons
behind it:
-
Types of Uterine Incisions
- *Low Transverse Incision*: Common and typically the
safest for VBAC.
- *Low Vertical Incision*: Generally acceptable for VBAC
with no significant evidence of increased rupture risk.
- *Classical Incision*: Not recommended for VBAC due to
higher risks.
- *Unknown Incision*: Most women with unknown
incisions can still consider VBAC, unless a classical incision
is suspected.
-
Reasons for Previous C-Section
Successful VBAC likelihood increases if the prior C-section
was for non-recurring issues. A history of vaginal delivery
also enhances chances.
Who Might Not Be a Candidate
A repeat C-section may be indicated in cases such as:
- Prior classical or T-shaped incisions.
- Previous uterine rupture.
- Significant medical complications preventing vaginal
delivery.
- Facilities lacking emergency C-section capabilities.
Tips for Planning a VBAC
- Communicate fears and expectations with your care
provider.
- Ensure the medical team is aware of your complete medical
history.
- Consider a VBAC class with a labor coach to alleviate
concerns.
- Choose a well-equipped hospital with resources for
continuous fetal monitoring and rapid surgical response.
- Avoid certain medications that may raise uterine rupture
risks.
- Engage actively in your preparation through healthy
lifestyle choices.
The focus should remain on achieving a healthy outcome for
both mother and baby, regardless of the delivery method.
Chapter 27 Summary : Contraception
after delivery
Chapter 26: Contraception After Delivery
Overview
Postpartum contraception is crucial as women can conceive
before their first menstrual period after childbirth. Early
conception, particularly within 18 months of delivery, may
carry health risks for both mother and baby.
Types of Birth Control Methods
1.
Hormonal Methods:
- Birth control pills, patches, rings, implants, and injections
that prevent ovulation.
2.
Barrier Methods:
- Condoms, diaphragms, cervical caps, and spermicides
that block sperm from reaching eggs.
3.
Intrauterine Devices (IUDs):
- Copper IUDs (ParaGard) and hormonal IUDs (Mirena,
Skyla) that prevent fertilization.
4.
Permanent Methods:
- Tubal ligation, hysteroscopic sterilization (Essure), and
vasectomy for irreversible contraception.
5.
Natural Family Planning:
- Methods like the rhythm method and monitoring basal
body temperature to avoid intercourse during fertile periods.
Considerations for Choosing a Method
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 28 Summary : PART 5:
Symptoms guide
Symptom Causes Prevention/Self-Care When to Seek Help
Abdominal
Discomfort
Stretching of ligaments and
muscles supporting the uterus.
Resting or soaking in warm water. Severe or persistent pain,
especially with bleeding or
fever.
Acne Increased oil secretion from
hormones.
Good skin hygiene, avoid irritants,
non-comedogenic products.
Consult a doctor before
medication use.
Allergies Nasal swelling leading to
congestion and allergy-like
symptoms.
Self-care remedies. Severe symptoms that don't
improve with self-care.
Baby's
Movements
Feeling of hiccups and movements
from week 15.
Monitor movement patterns. Reduced activity warrants a
check-up.
Backache Changes in posture and weight
distribution.
Good posture, proper lifting
techniques, regular exercise.
N/A
Blurry
Vision
Changes in fluid retention affecting
eyesight.
N/A Sudden blurry vision or
headaches.
Breast
Changes
Colostrum leakage, hormonal
changes.
Wear supportive bras. N/A
Constipation Hormonal changes and pressure
from the uterus.
High-fiber diet, hydration, regular
exercise.
N/A
False vs.
True Labor
Monitoring contractions. N/A Differentiate between Braxton
Hicks and true labor.
Dizziness
and
Faintness
Circulatory changes and low blood
sugar.
Move slowly, stay hydrated, avoid
long periods standing.
N/A
Fatigue Hormonal changes and physical
demands.
Prioritize rest, maintain a balanced
diet.
N/A
Heartburn Hormonal changes and pressure on
stomach.
Smaller meals, avoid trigger foods,
consider elevation while sleeping.
N/A
Nasal
Congestion
Hormonal effects on nasal tissues. Use humidifiers and saline rinses. N/A
Nesting
Instinct
A strong desire to prepare home. N/A N/A
Sensitivity
to Smells
Heightened sense of smell
triggering nausea.
Avoid odors that provoke nausea. N/A
Urinary
Changes
Increased frequency due to bladder
pressure, risk of UTIs.
Drink lots of fluids, maintain hygiene. N/A
Leg and Hip
Pain
Changes in joint laxity and weight
distribution.
Stretching and mobility exercises. N/A
PART 5 Symptoms Guide
Pregnancy can bring various concerns, including acne,
morning sickness, fatigue, heartburn, and more. This guide
provides tips and insights for managing common pregnancy
symptoms.
Abdominal Discomfort
-
Causes
: Often due to the stretching of ligaments and muscles
supporting the uterus as it expands.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Resting or soaking in warm water can help alleviate
discomfort.
-
When to Seek Help
: Severe or persistent pain may require medical evaluation,
especially if accompanied by bleeding or fever.
Acne
-
Causes
: Increased oil secretion from hormones can lead to acne.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Maintain good skin hygiene, avoid irritants, and use
non-comedogenic products.
-
Medical Care
: Consult a doctor before using any medication.
Allergies
-
Causes
: Pregnancy may cause nasal swelling, leading to congestion
and allergy-like symptoms.
-
When to Seek Help
: Severe symptoms that don't improve with self-care require
medical attention.
Baby's Movements
-
Hiccups and Kicks
: Starting around week 15, you may feel your baby's hiccups
and movements, known as quickening.
-
Monitoring
: Observe changes in movement patterns; reduced activity
could warrant a check-up.
Backache
-
Causes
: Changes in posture and weight distribution can lead to back
pain.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Good posture, proper lifting techniques, and regular
exercise can help.
Blurry Vision
-
Causes
: Changes in fluid retention can affect eyesight during
pregnancy.
-
When to Seek Help
: Sudden blurry vision or accompanying headaches should be
reported to a healthcare provider.
Breast Changes
-
Discharge
: Colostrum leakage may occur as your due date approaches.
-
Enlargement and Tenderness
: Hormonal changes lead to increased breast size and
sensitivity; wearing supportive bras can help manage
discomfort.
Constipation
-
Causes
: Hormonal changes and pressure from the uterus slow
digestion.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: High-fiber diet, hydration, and regular exercise can help.
False vs. True Labor
-
Contractions
: Monitor the frequency and intensity of contractions to
differentiate between false labor (Braxton Hicks) and true
labor.
Dizziness and Faintness
-
Causes
: Circulatory changes and low blood sugar may cause
dizziness.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Move slowly, stay hydrated, and avoid standing for long
periods.
Fatigue
-
Causes
: Hormonal changes and physical demands of pregnancy can
lead to tiredness.
-
Self-Care
: Prioritize rest and maintain a balanced diet for energy.
Heartburn
-
Causes
: Hormonal changes and pressure on the stomach can lead to
acid reflux.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Eat smaller meals, avoid trigger foods, and consider
elevation while sleeping.
Nasal Congestion
-
Causes
: It is common due to hormonal effects on nasal tissues.
-
Prevention and Self-Care
: Use humidifiers and saline rinses for relief.
Nesting Instinct
-
Description
: A strong desire to prepare your home before the baby
arrives.
Sensitivity to Smells
-
Effects
: Heightened sense of smell can trigger nausea.
-
Prevention
: Identify and avoid odors that provoke nausea.
Urinary Changes
-
Increased Frequency
: Normal early in pregnancy due to bladder pressure.
-
Urinary Tract Infections
: Important to manage; drink lots of fluids and maintain
hygiene.
Leg and Hip Pain
-
Causes
: Due to changes in joint laxity and weight distribution.
-
Self-Care
: Stretching and mobility exercises can help relieve
discomfort.
Throughout the pregnancy, if any symptom feels abnormal or
concerning, it’s essential to reach out to a healthcare provider
for advice and management.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The guide emphasizes self-care in
managing common pregnancy symptoms.
Critical Interpretation:The author's recommendation to
focus on self-care and preventative measures during
pregnancy is essential for maintaining maternal
well-being. However, it may inadvertently suggest that
such symptoms should always be manageable without
professional intervention. In truth, while self-care
strategies like diet and hydration can provide relief,
there could be underlying health issues that need
medical attention. To portray pregnancy as a solely
self-managed experience may limit the understanding of
the full spectrum of maternal health. Sources such as
'The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists' highlight the significance of regular
check-ups and professional guidance, urging that
symptoms should not always be dismissed as normal.
Chapter 29 Summary : Issues during
pregnancy
CHAPTER 27: Issues During Pregnancy
If unexpected problems arise during pregnancy, women may
feel concerned or frightened. This chapter discusses
complications that can occur and their treatments,
emphasizing the importance of understanding these issues
and following healthcare provider advice.
Blood Complications
-
Rhesus Factor Incompatibility:
Occurs when an Rh-negative mother carries an Rh-positive
baby, leading to the mother producing antibodies that can
harm future pregnancies. Treatment involves Rh immune
globulin (RhIg) to prevent antibody formation.
-
Iron Deficiency Anemia:
Common in the second half of pregnancy, caused by
insufficient iron to produce red blood cells. Symptoms
include fatigue, weakness, and pallor. Treatment typically
involves iron supplements or blood transfusions if severe.
Cervical Incompetence:
A condition where the cervix opens prematurely without
contractions, potentially leading to second-trimester losses.
Symptoms may include spotting or pelvic pressure.
Treatment can involve a cerclage, stitching the cervix to
support the pregnancy.
Depression:
Common during and after pregnancy, with symptoms like
persistent low mood, loss of interest in daily activities, and
sleep disturbances. Treatment includes counseling, therapy,
and possibly safe antidepressant medications. Emergency
help is essential for suicidal thoughts.
Early Labor:
Preterm labor involves contractions before 37 weeks,
potentially causing complications for the baby. Risk factors
include previous preterm births, multiple pregnancies, and
certain health issues. Management involves monitoring and
possible progesterone therapy.
-
Bed Rest and Activity Restriction:
Previously common, bed rest is no longer recommended due
to risks like blood clots. Activity restrictions may be
suggested instead, depending on the complication.
Excessive Vomiting:
Known as hyperemesis gravidarum, this severe form of
vomiting can lead to dehydration and malnutrition.
Treatment may include medication and IV fluids.
Fetal Growth Restriction (FGR):
Diagnosed through ultrasound when a fetus grows slower
than normal. Causes may include placental issues or maternal
health factors. Monitoring and possibly early delivery are
essential to improve outcomes.
Gestational Diabetes:
Develops when the body cannot effectively manage blood
sugar during pregnancy, with risks including high birth
weight and complications for both mother and baby.
Management includes diet control and blood sugar
monitoring.
Infections During Pregnancy:
Pregnant women remain susceptible to various infections.
Important ones include:
-
Chickenpox:
Serious if contracted late in pregnancy, manageable with
Varizig.
-
Cytomegalovirus (CMV):
Can cause severe congenital infections; hygiene is crucial.
-
Fifth Disease:
Generally harmless, but can cause severe anemia in the
fetus.
-
Influenza:
Vaccination recommended; antiviral treatment beneficial.
-
German Measles:
Dangerous during pregnancy; vaccination post-childbirth is
recommended.
-
Group B Streptococcus:
Treated with antibiotics during labor to prevent neonatal
infections.
-
Listeriosis and Toxoplasmosis:
Preventable through food safety and hygiene practices.
-
Tuberculosis and Zika Virus:
Active TB can be treated safely during pregnancy, while
Zika infections pose serious risks, necessitating avoidance of
exposure.
Placental Problems
-
Placental Abruption:
Premature separation from the uterus; can lead to severe
complications. Management depends on the severity and
gestational age.
-
Placenta Previa:
The placenta covers the cervix, posing bleeding risks.
Management involves monitoring, activity restrictions, and
potential cesarean delivery if necessary.
Preeclampsia and Hypertension:
Characterized by high blood pressure and protein in urine
after the 20th week, it requires careful monitoring and may
necessitate early delivery to protect both mother and baby.
Risks of future cardiovascular issues increase postpartum.
Overall, many pregnancy complications can be managed
effectively with proper medical care and support. Awareness
and proactive discussions with healthcare providers are vital
for successful outcomes during pregnancy.
Example
Key Point:Understanding and addressing pregnancy
complications is crucial for a healthy outcome.
Example:Imagine being weeks away from meeting your
little one, yet facing the fear of sudden complications
like high blood pressure or gestational diabetes. It's vital
to prepare for these unexpected issues by staying
informed about potential warning signs. By attending
regular check-ups and following your healthcare
provider's advice, you empower yourself to manage
risks effectively, ensuring optimal conditions for both
you and your baby. This proactive approach not only
alleviates anxiety but also increases the chances of a
safe and healthy pregnancy journey.
Chapter 30 Summary : Problems of
labor and childbirth
Chapter 28: Problems of Labor and Childbirth
Introduction
Even with proper preparation, complications during labor
and delivery can arise. It's important to trust your healthcare
team and remain flexible. Communication with your care
provider is essential to understand concerns and create a
comfortable care plan.
Labor That Fails to Start
-
Induction of Labor
: If labor does not start naturally, induction may be
recommended for health reasons or timing (e.g., after 41
weeks).
-
Induction Methods
: Cervical ripening can be achieved through medication (e.g.,
misoprostol, dinoprostone) or mechanical techniques (e.g.,
balloon catheter).
-
Oxytocin
: A common method for inducing labor, administered
intravenously, enhancing contractions during labor.
Labor That Fails to Progress
-
Dystocia
: Poor progress may result from inadequate contractions,
baby's position, or pelvic size. Treatments include
medication to stimulate contractions, breaking the water, or,
if necessary, cesarean delivery.
-
Prolonged Labor
: Early labor can last longer for first-time mothers. If
progress halts, rest or walking may be recommended.
-
Prolonged Pushing
: Defined as over three hours for first-time mothers or two for
Install Bookey App to Unlock Full Text and
Audio

Chapter 31 Summary : Managing mom’s
health concerns
Summary of Chapter 31: Managing Mom's Health
Concerns
Pre-existing Health Conditions
Pregnancy requires careful health management, especially
when pre-existing health issues are involved. Common
conditions include:
-
Asthma
: Proper medication and management can prevent
complications.
-
Cancer
: Treatment may need to be adjusted during pregnancy to
protect the mother and fetus.
-
Depression
: It's crucial to manage depression to ensure the health of
both mother and baby, including possible adjustments in
medications.
-
Diabetes
: Blood sugar control is vital as uncontrolled diabetes can
lead to serious birth defects and complications.
-
Epilepsy
: Continuation of seizure medications is important for the
mother and baby's safety.
-
Heart Disease
: Monitoring is essential, as pregnancy increases stress on the
cardiovascular system.
-
Hepatitis B
: Management focuses on preventing transmission to the
baby during birth.
Specific Health Concerns
Several health issues that require special attention during
pregnancy include:
-
High Blood Pressure
: Requires careful monitoring and potential medication
adjustments.
-
Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura (ITP)
: Low platelet counts must be managed, especially regarding
delivery methods.
-
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD)
: Control of symptoms is key for a healthy pregnancy.
-
Lupus
: Active lupus poses risks during pregnancy that must be
managed by specialists.
-
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
: Diet management preconception and during pregnancy is
crucial to prevent fetal damage.
-
Rheumatoid Arthritis
: Treatment adjustments may be required, but many women
report symptom improvement during pregnancy.
Infections and STIs
Undiagnosed infections can lead to serious complications.
Key infections to be aware of include:
-
Chlamydia & Gonorrhea
: Can cause miscarriage and complications during delivery.
-
Herpes
: Risk of transmission at delivery necessitates monitoring and
possibly a C-section.
-
HIV/AIDS
: Routine testing and management can minimize transmission
risk to the baby.
-
Syphilis
: Requires early screening and treatment due to potential fetal
complications.
Postpartum Care
After delivery, new mothers face potential health concerns,
including:
-
Blood Clots (DVT)
: Increased risk post-cesarean; symptoms include leg
tenderness and swelling.
-
Excessive Bleeding
: Can result from uterine atony, retained placenta, or
lacerations.
-
Infections
: Common issues include endometritis and mastitis, needing
prompt treatment.
-
Postpartum Depression
: Recognizing symptoms early and seeking intervention is
vital for recovery.
Self-Care for Postpartum Depression
New mothers should prioritize:
- Rest and nutrition.
- Physical activity and social connections.
- Seeking support and making time for self-care to aid
recovery.
This chapter emphasizes the importance of managing both
pre-existing and new health issues for the well-being of
mothers and their babies during and after pregnancy.
Chapter 32 Summary : Pregnancy loss
Pregnancy Loss: An Overview
Pregnancy loss encompasses various events such as
miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, molar pregnancy, preterm
birth, and stillbirth, often bringing with it grief, confusion,
and a complex array of emotions. Understanding the types
and causes of these losses can aid in coping and planning for
future pregnancies.
Miscarriage
*Definition and Frequency*
- Miscarriage is the spontaneous loss of a pregnancy before
20 weeks, affecting approximately 20% of known
pregnancies, though actual rates may be higher.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- Symptoms can include vaginal spotting, abdominal pain,
and passing of fluid or tissue. Infection can occur, leading to
septic miscarriage symptoms like fever and chills.
*Causes*
- Most miscarriages arise from chromosomal abnormalities,
often spontaneous, rather than inherited. Risk factors include
advanced maternal and paternal age, history of previous
miscarriages, and lifestyle factors like smoking and alcohol
use.
*Types of Miscarriages*
-
Threatened Miscarriage:
Bleeding without cervix dilation.
-
Inevitable Miscarriage:
Bleeding and dilation present.
-
Incomplete Miscarriage:
Some tissue remains in the uterus.
-
Missed Miscarriage:
Embryo dies but remains in utero.
-
Complete Miscarriage:
All tissue passed.
-
Septic Miscarriage:
Infection present.
*Diagnosis*
- Consulting a doctor is crucial for evaluation, potentially
involving pelvic exams, ultrasounds, and blood tests.
*Treatment Options*
- Management varies from observation to medical
(medications) or surgical (D&C) interventions, depending on
individual circumstances and preferences.
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss
*Definition and Causes*
- Characterized by two or more consecutive losses,
potentially arising from genetic issues, anatomical anomalies,
or blood clotting conditions.
*Emotional and Procedural Considerations*
- Emotional support is vital; understanding the causes may
guide future pregnancies. Follow-up care tailored to
individual histories can enhance chances of success in
subsequent pregnancies.
Recovery from Loss
*Physical Recovery*
- Generally swift, lasting from days to weeks, with return to
normal menstrual cycles expected within a month. Emotional
healing may take longer and varies significantly between
individuals.
*Emotional Healing*
- Grieving is essential. Seeking support and allowing oneself
to process emotions are critical to recovery.
Ectopic Pregnancy
*Definition*
- Occurs when a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus,
often in a fallopian tube, posing severe risks to maternal
health.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- Symptoms include sharp pelvic pain and abnormal
bleeding; immediate medical consultation is necessary upon
presentation.
*Treatment*
- Management may involve medication like methotrexate or
surgical interventions to prevent complications.
Molar Pregnancy
*Definition and Types*
- A rare condition resulting from abnormal placental
development, potentially leading to a complete or partial
mole.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- Characterized by abnormal bleeding and enlarged uterus,
typically diagnosed via ultrasound.
*Treatment*
- Requires surgical intervention (D&C) and careful
monitoring of HCG levels post-treatment.
Stillbirth
*Definition and Causes*
- Characterizes the loss of a baby after 20 weeks. Causes may
include genetic issues, placental problems, or maternal health
complications, often remaining unexplained.
*Signs and Symptoms*
- A notable reduction in fetal movement could indicate
issues, necessitating immediate medical evaluation.
*Treatment and Coping Strategies*
- Induction of labor is common for delivery, along with
emotional support strategies like naming the baby and
memorializing the loss.
Coping with Pregnancy Loss
*Strategies for Grieving*
- Accepting the need to grieve is vital. Connection with
supportive individuals helps in the healing process.
*Considerations for Future Pregnancies*
- Medical evaluation may reveal factors affecting prior
losses, and each pregnancy should be closely monitored.
*Partner Support*
- Partners must recognize and respond to each other's grief
differently for effective support.
Conclusion
Pregnancy loss, whether through miscarriage, ectopic
pregnancy, molar pregnancy, or stillbirth, is a challenging
experience that necessitates physical and emotional recovery.
Open communication, support from healthcare providers, and
connection to loved ones are essential for navigating this
difficult journey.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:Understanding the diversity of pregnancy
loss impacts emotional healing.
Critical Interpretation:The author asserts that grasping
the various types of pregnancy loss can facilitate coping
with grief; however, it's crucial to recognize that
individual experiences vary significantly. Some may not
find solace in the categorization of losses, as the
emotional weight of such events transcends definitions.
Research indicates that emotional healing is deeply
personal and can differ widely among individuals,
suggesting that the author's framework may not
universally apply (Bennett et al., 2015). This
perspective invites readers to critically evaluate the
one-size-fits-all approach to grieving and consider
alternative healing methods.

Best Quotes from Mayo Clinic Guide to a
Healthy Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick by
Myra J. Wick with Page Numbers
View on Bookey Website and Generate Beautiful Quote Images
Chapter 1 | Quotes From Pages 14-62
1.Having a child is a wonderful experience that will
enrich your life forever.
2.If you’re reading this book and are still in the planning
stages before becoming pregnant, you’re giving yourself a
head start on the exhilarating, sometimes bewildering path
toward parenthood.
3.Questions to ask: Why do I want to have a baby?
4.Taking steps to be healthy and informed now can help set
you up to enjoy a healthy pregnancy.
5.Your partner’s health and lifestyle — including family
medical history and risk factors for infections or birth
defects — are important because they, too, can affect you
and your baby.
6.The sooner you set the stage for a successful outcome, the
better your odds.
7.Make healthy lifestyle choices. Maintain a healthy weight,
include physical activity in your daily routine, eat a healthy
diet, limit caffeine and keep stress under control.
8.You don’t have to be exceptionally fit to have a child, but if
you’re healthy to begin with, you have a better chance of
enjoying a healthy pregnancy.
9.If you decide to return to work, do I have access to good
child care?
Chapter 2 | Quotes From Pages 63-148
1.A new baby on the way is a great reason to take
stock of your current lifestyle.
2.Eating well helps create ideal conditions for early fetal
development.
3.If you can remember these key principles, you and baby
will be well on your way to a balanced diet.
4.If you’re pregnant with twins or other multiples, you’ll
likely need more nutrients and calories.
5.Pregnancy is the one time in your life when you can gain as
much weight as you want and not worry about it.
6.Exercise can help reduce common pregnancy complaints,
such as back pain.
7.Regular exercise can help you prepare for labor and
childbirth by increasing your stamina and muscle strength.
8.Your body uses iron to produce hemoglobin, a substance in
red blood cells that carries oxygen.
9.Pregnancy isn’t the time to try to lose weight.
10.Seek advice on supplements. Many vegans need a vitamin
B-12 supplement.
Chapter 3 | Quotes From Pages 149-180
1.If you’re an expectant parent — but not the
pregnant one — you may be wondering how you
fit into this adventure.
2.There’s plenty you can do to feel less like a bystander and
more like an active participant in your expanding family.
3.Talk and sing to your baby while massaging your partner’s
belly.
4.Support your partner in a healthy lifestyle.
5.Pregnancy-related hormonal patterns in men tend to mirror
those of women in general.
6.To help ease the way for your partner (and yourself),
consider these tips: Minimize nausea triggers.
7.You’re a parent, and a whole new path has opened up to
you.

Chapter 4 | Quotes From Pages 181-189
1.When in doubt, it’s better to be safe than sorry.
2.Pregnancy doesn’t divide itself evenly into months.
3.If you’re at high risk of gestational diabetes.
Chapter 5 | Quotes From Pages 190-221
1.... we were expecting our first child!
2.Pregnancy can be a wild ride. Try to relax, and enjoy the
adventure to its fullest!
3.The process begins when you and your partner have sexual
intercourse. When he ejaculates, your partner releases into
your vagina semen containing up to 1 billion sperm cells.
4.... at this point, your egg is about 1/200 of an inch in
diameter, too small to be seen.
5.Fertilization is now complete. Weeks 3 and 4 Once your
baby is conceived, he or she gets to work right away.
6.Your emotions are all over the place, because they will be.
Pregnancy can be exciting, boring, satisfying... sometimes
all at once.
7.... your emotions are strongly influenced by the support
you receive from your partner and family.
Chapter 6 | Quotes From Pages 222-263
1.It’s probably a cliché, but when it happens to you,
inside you, it feels like a miracle.
2.Your baby’s first heartbeats occur at 21 to 22 days after
conception.
3.If you’re concerned about early miscarriage, concentrate on
taking good care of yourself and your baby.
4.Your emotions... Pregnancy is a psychological journey as
well as a biological one.
5.Anticipation is a normal part of making the transition to
parenthood.

Chapter 7 | Quotes From Pages 264-287
1.I feel like my body is preparing me for
motherhood by reminding me what it’s like to be a
child. I eat every three hours, want things I don’t
need, cry because I’m tired and I’ve become a bit
of a narcissist.
2.Hang in there — you will start to feel better soon!
3.Simply put, you may feel fat. Try to remember that your
body is changing for the important work of growing and
nurturing your baby.
4.Your increased blood volume and increased production of
the hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) are
working together to give you that pregnancy glow.
5.Most women, while interest in intercourse continues during
pregnancy, it may decrease a bit. This is perfectly normal.
Chapter 8 | Quotes From Pages 288-318
1.One down and two to go! The beginning of the
second trimester is generally a time of relief for
most pregnant women.
2.You’ve made it past the first three months — the stage of
pregnancy when pregnancy loss is most common.
3.Enjoy this time. Get out and do the things you love.
4.The skeletal and nervous systems have made enough
connections to signal movements of the limbs and body.
5.You may feel a little scatterbrained or forgetful. This is
normal, no matter how organized you were (or weren’t)
before pregnancy.
6.The bond between parent and child is unique and can’t be
replaced.
Chapter 9 | Quotes From Pages 319-338
1.It is the most amazing feeling — it feels like
someone is tickling me lightly from the inside.
2.Feeling your baby flip, kick or punch for the first time ... is
a great source of wonder and reassurance for most women.
3.Your baby may be swallowing a good dose of amniotic
fluid every day.
4.Make a note of the date, and tell your care provider at your
next visit.
5.Your emotions ... may bring a sense of reality.

Chapter 10 | Quotes From Pages 339-362
1.I’m starting to get really excited, and I wonder a
lot about what the baby will look like.
2.If your little one was born at the end of this month, he or
she would have about a 50 percent chance of survival. The
odds get better with each passing week as baby’s lungs and
other organs continue crucial development.
3.On the bright side, the long-term outlook for premature
babies is improving each year as knowledge in the field of
neonatal medicine continues to expand.
4.Take time to sit down and make a list of your fears, and ask
your partner to do the same. Then compare lists and share
these concerns with your care provider.
5.You may want to enjoy this feeling while it lasts — and
before your baby arrives, which will likely affect your sex
life.
6.Routine visits often mean everything is going well and
progressing on schedule.
7.The biggest difference between true labor and Braxton
Hicks contractions is the effect on your cervix.
Chapter 11 | Quotes From Pages 363-387
1.If you want to get them, fine. But they’re for you.
Your baby only needs to be comfortable, well-fed
and, most of all, loved.
2.Enjoy a little break Slow down, sit back and relax — while
you can.
3.Your baby may start recognizing your voice this week, as
well as your partner’s.
4.If you don’t want the touch but aren’t comfortable speaking
up, you may try to cover your belly with your own hands
first, as a gentle reminder that it’s your own body.
5.If you think you prefer to formula-feed your baby, make
sure you’ve learned about breast-feeding and its benefits
before solidifying your decision.
Chapter 12 | Quotes From Pages 388-424
1.Your baby is also developing a sleep and wake
cycle. During periods of sleep, baby will be quiet.
2.A significant drop in fetal activity in the last trimester of
pregnancy may indicate a problem with the umbilical cord
or placenta.
3.The best sleep position at this point is on your side. The left
side is preferable to allow for maximum blood flow, but
either side is fine.
4.It’s one of the most annoying side effects of pregnancy, but
it won’t last forever. It generally disappears after baby is
born.
5.Your provider may want to check the condition of your
baby. Usually, everything is fine.

Chapter 13 | Quotes From Pages 425-450
1.Perhaps it’s good that the pregnancy lasts 10
months, because it gives us some time to get ready
for the arrival of this new family member.
2.Keep in mind that your perseverance and patience are soon
about to pay off.
3.Fatigue is your body’s way of telling you to slow down.
4.To help you prepare, and stay calm: Educate yourself.
Knowing what’s going to happen to your body when you
give birth will make you less tense and fearful as it actually
takes place.
Chapter 14 | Quotes From Pages 451-477
1.I think nature’s way of making us look forward to
labor is to make the final month extremely
uncomfortable.
2.Try to be patient, although with all the work you’ve done,
that may not be easy.
3.If you’re frightened and anxious during labor, you’ll have a
more difficult labor.
4.Your own baby may be smaller or larger and still be normal
and healthy.
5.Your pregnancy is almost over.
Chapter 15 | Quotes From Pages 478-531
1.Control what you can — but be ready to let go of
what you can’t control.
2.Try to relax. Women’s bodies are made to accommodate
labor and delivery. Labor, as the name implies, is work;
that’s true. But you can help make the experience go as
smoothly as possible by trying to relax.
3.Don’t worry if you feel overwhelmed or unsure — it’s
normal. It’s a big job, and it’s okay to feel a mix of
emotions.
4.Savor this moment, cherish it and embrace the joy that
nothing else in life can quite match.

Chapter 16 | Quotes From Pages 532-561
1.If you’re feeling anxious about a scheduled repeat
cesarean birth, discuss your fears with your care
provider, childbirth educator or partner.
2.Almost all mothers and babies recover well after a
C-section, with few problems. Although you would
probably have preferred a vaginal birth, remind yourself
that your health and the health of your baby are much more
important than is the method of delivery.
3.If you’ve had a previous C-section, you may need to have
one again. But this isn’t always the case.
4.Stay flexible. Sometimes the second baby changes position
or has heart rate problems after the first baby is born.
5.It’s important to remember that any childbirth carries risks
for both the mother and the baby.
Chapter 17 | Quotes From Pages 564-611
1.Your time in the hospital is also an opportunity to
ask questions — you’ll likely have many!
2.Take advantage of their expertise.
3.Your body has been through a significant workout.
4.Once you get home, spare moments may be few and far
between.
5.Your newborn will first appear somewhat messy looking.
6.A rounded swelling of the scalp is usually seen on the top
and back of the baby’s head when a baby is born the usual
way — headfirst.
Chapter 18 | Quotes From Pages 612-657
1.No matter how many pregnancy and baby care
books you’ve read or how meticulous you’ve been
in getting everything in place, nothing can fully
prepare you for the first few weeks after your
baby’s birth.
2.Be patient with yourself and your baby. You’ll get there in
your own way and in your own time.
3.During the first few weeks of a newborn’s life, it may seem
like all he or she does is eat, sleep, cry and keep you busy
changing diapers.
4.Crying is the first and primary form of communication that
newborns use. And they do plenty of it — young babies
typically cry on average from one to four hours a day.
5.You’ll soon become a pro at everything from changing
diapers to giving your little one a bath.
6.It’s common to feel frustrated, angry, tense, irritable,
worried and fatigued.
7.If your baby was born with a birth defect, spits up often
after eating, or has a breathing, lung or heart problem, talk
to your baby’s care provider about the best sleeping
position for your child.
8.If something is wrong, don’t hesitate to reach out for
supportive resources.

Chapter 19 | Quotes From Pages 658-691
1.With a healthy lifestyle, it will! But it does take
time to recover from the changes that occurred
over the previous 10 months.
2.It’s not unrealistic to expect to bounce back quickly after
giving birth, but over time you will start to feel better
physically and get back in shape.
3.Breast self-examination can be more difficult during
pregnancy and breast-feeding, but being observant of your
breast appearance and consistency is still important.
4.Keep in mind that your feelings are very normal. Up to 80
percent of women feel mood changes in the first two weeks
after birth.
5.Your feelings will become stronger with time. Give it time.
Chapter 20 | Quotes From Pages 692-727
1.Rest assured that feeling anxious or nervous about
your new responsibilities is completely normal.
2.Early survival tips Don’t be surprised if the first few
weeks, or even months, with your newborn are full of
chaos.
3.It’s OK to accept help, too.
4.Successful parenting takes practice, which means making
mistakes and moving on to the next strategy.
5.Make sleep a priority. Lack of sleep is cumulative, and
constant fatigue can be a trigger for depression and anxiety.
6.Maintain a sense of humor. Babies can make you do things
you’ve never dreamed of before, like cleaning poop off
your hands.
7.Try to be more tolerant of yourself and of your partner. No
parent is perfect, and no new parent is going to get
everything right on day one.
8.Recognizing that the road ahead might be a bit bumpy
seemed to better prepare them for the transition to
parenthood.
9.If you’re overwhelmed, eliminate activities that aren’t
absolutely necessary.
10.But most of all, listen to yourself and your child.
Chapter 21 | Quotes From Pages 730-754
1.Genetic screening tests offer expectant and new
parents an opportunity to explore whether their
child may be at risk of a genetic disorder.
2.Most babies are born healthy without genetic problems.
3.The decision to pursue genetic screening is a personal one.
4.If you have a family member who’s experienced a high
number of miscarriages, mention this to your care provider.
5.Testing for autosomal recessive diseases may be done for
specific ethnic groups in which certain recessive diseases
are more common or if there’s a family history of an
autosomal recessive disease.
6.A genetic counselor can talk you through the types of
conditions being screened and also discuss the limitations
of the screening.

Chapter 22 | Quotes From Pages 755-804
1.It may reassure you to know that most
pregnancies — more than 95 percent — are
healthy and result in the safe delivery of a healthy
baby.
2.Whatever the reason, certain tests can help determine the
health of your baby while he or she is still in your womb.
3.It’s worthwhile to know about screening options so that
you can make informed decisions about them.
4.The majority of women will have a healthy baby.
5.If a test indicates that your baby may have a birth defect or
another health condition, how will you handle it?
Chapter 23 | Quotes From Pages 805-847
1.Breast milk is best, and the benefits of
breast-feeding are well-established.
2.Feeding your baby formula instead of breast milk shouldn’t
lead to feelings of guilt.
3.Throughout this adjustment, remember that feeding your
newborn is about more than just nourishment.
4.Breast milk provides babies with: Ideal nutrition.
5.Breast-feeding can promote intimacy and closeness
between mom and baby.
6.It’s a natural process, but that doesn’t mean it comes easily
to everyone.
7.If your baby is to thrive, he or she needs a healthy mother.
8.Sometimes breast-feeding isn’t possible.
9.Seek help if you need it.
Chapter 24 | Quotes From Pages 848-861
1.No two women have the same tolerance for pain.
No two labors are exactly the same, either.
2.Ultimately, you need to choose what’s right for you.
3.Labors often don’t go according to plan.
4.You won’t have failed if you ask for pain medication.
5.Education itself may be a form of pain relief.

Chapter 25 | Quotes From Pages 862-876
1.Educate yourself about the risks and benefits of
both ways of delivery, and discuss the pros and
cons with your health care team — but don’t let
fear be the deciding factor.
2.Some women fear that the effort involved in pushing a
baby through the birth canal may cause fecal or urinary
incontinence, damage pelvic muscles, or injure pelvic
nerves.
3.However, it should generally be scheduled for no earlier
than 39 weeks into your pregnancy, to help ensure your
baby’s safety.
4.If you had a previous vaginal delivery that was especially
difficult, remind yourself that no two labors are alike and
that giving birth this time may be a much different
experience.
5.The best way to make a decision is to be as informed as
possible. Ask yourself why this approach is attractive to
you.
Chapter 26 | Quotes From Pages 877-889
1.It used to be that once you had a C-section, all of
your subsequent deliveries would be by cesarean
as well. Today, a vaginal birth after cesarean
(VBAC) is possible for many women.
2.A vaginal birth is generally safer than a C-section, because
it doesn’t involve major surgery.
3.Your labor coach and others also may be able to play a
greater role in a vaginal delivery.
4.Keep your ultimate goal in mind. You want both you and
baby to have a healthy outcome, regardless of how you get
there.
5.Most women who’ve undergone a cesarean delivery are
candidates for a vaginal birth in their subsequent
pregnancies.
Chapter 27 | Quotes From Pages 890-928
1.Choosing a birth control method is a personal
decision that should take into account your
individual health, lifestyle, and family planning
goals.
2.If you're planning another pregnancy in the near future, you
may want a birth control method that’s easy to stop using
and quickly reversible.
3.It’s important to choose a type of birth control that suits
your lifestyle.
4.Breast-feeding can be as effective as condom use for
contraception, for up to six months — but only if all of the
following are true: You’re exclusively breast-feeding.
5.For many new moms, juggling feedings and work
schedules with a partner can make these conditions
unrealistic.

Chapter 28 | Quotes From Pages 929-1325
1.Knowing more about why you’re feeling moody,
and realizing these mood swings are temporary,
can help you weather your moody storms.
2.As your due date nears, you may find yourself cleaning
cupboards, washing walls, organizing your closets... This
powerful urge to clean, organize and decorate before the
baby arrives is called the nesting instinct.
3.Rest. Accept the fact that you need extra rest during these
ten months, and plan your daily life accordingly.
4.Mild shortness of breath is common in pregnancy, but
severe shortness of breath, especially if it’s accompanied
by chest pain, may indicate a more serious problem.
5.Many women have increased vaginal discharge throughout
pregnancy. This discharge, called leukorrhea, is thin, white,
and mild smelling or odorless.
Chapter 29 | Quotes From Pages 1328-1406
1.Many problems that develop during pregnancy
can be successfully managed.
2.Listen to your care provider’s advice and ask questions
until you feel that you fully understand the complication
and how best to treat it.
3.If anemia is suspected, steps can be taken to prevent harm
to the baby.
4.Depression is a common mood disorder that is serious but
treatable.
5.If you think you may be depressed, talk with your care
provider about it.
6.Gestational diabetes usually resolves after delivery.
7.The only cure for preeclampsia and other hypertensive
problems in pregnancy is delivery.
Chapter 30 | Quotes From Pages 1407-1433
1.If something does go wrong, trust that your care
provider and your health care team will do the
best for both you and your baby.
2.When complications arise and things don’t go as planned,
it’s easy to feel out of control, but be as flexible as you can
and try not to panic.
3.Ask as many questions as you need to in order to feel
comfortable with the plan of care.
4.Induction may allow you to be more prepared, mentally
and physically, when you go to the hospital.
5.Whatever the cause, if your cervix is still fairly closed
when you arrive at the hospital or birthing center and your
contractions aren’t very strong, your care provider may
suggest some options to promote labor.
6.Your care provider will evaluate how far down the birth
canal the baby has descended and if the problem can be
corrected by readjusting the baby’s head position.
7.In extreme situations, low oxygen levels can be
life-threatening. Your care provider is trained to identify
the signs of severe distress and take immediate action,
which generally involves emergency cesarean delivery.

Chapter 31 | Quotes From Pages 1434-1482
1.The good news is, with a doctor’s help and
guidance, most problems can be managed in a way
that’s safe for both you and your baby.
2.If your asthma is well-controlled during pregnancy, there’s
little chance you and your baby will have an increased risk
of health complications.
3.The prognosis generally is the same as that of women with
breast cancer who aren’t pregnant. However, it’s important
that treatment begins right away.
4.If you don’t take proper care of depression during
pregnancy, you may put your health — and your baby’s
health — at risk.
5.If you have IBD, pregnancy shouldn’t significantly affect
your treatment. Most of the medications commonly used to
treat IBD don’t harm the fetus.
6.With proper care and support, most women experiencing
postpartum depression are able to recover and lead
fulfilling lives.
7.It’s very important that you seek professional care.
8.If your platelet count is very low, medications may be
given to try and raise your platelet count before your baby
is born.
Chapter 32 | Quotes From Pages 1483-1532
1.Most often, the cause of recurrent miscarriage is
not identified. Don’t give up hope. Even if you’ve
had repeated miscarriages, you still have a good
chance of a successful future pregnancy.
2.Emotional healing may take much longer than physical
healing. Miscarriage can be a heart-wrenching loss that
others around you may not fully understand.
3.Grieving is the process of letting go of the emotional
attachment you’ve developed. Stages of grief ... have no
timetable.
4.Talk to your care provider if you’re feeling profound
sadness or depression. Most women who’ve had a
miscarriage go on to have successful pregnancies.
5.Say goodbye to the baby. Grieving is a vital step in
accepting and recovering from your loss.

Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick Questions
View on Bookey Website
Chapter 1 | Preparing to become pregnant| Q&A
1.Question
Why is it important to think ahead before having a baby?
Answer:Thinking ahead can help set you and your
baby up for the best possible beginning. It allows
you to prepare emotionally, financially, and
physically for the changes that parenthood will
bring, making the transition to pregnancy smoother.
2.Question
What key questions should I consider when determining
if the time is right to have a baby?
Answer:Consider why you want to have a baby, whether
your partner shares your feelings and beliefs about parenting,
how a baby will impact your lifestyle and career, and if
you’re emotionally and financially ready for this
responsibility.
3.Question
How can I prepare my body for pregnancy?
Answer:Make a preconception appointment with your care
provider to assess your health, discuss chronic conditions,
and receive advice on health practices. Start taking prenatal
vitamins to ensure you're getting essential nutrients before
conception.
4.Question
What is the significance of taking prenatal vitamins
before conception?
Answer:Prenatal vitamins are crucial as they provide
necessary nutrients like folic acid that help prevent neural
tube defects. This proactive step supports early fetal
development which occurs even before you may know you're
pregnant.
5.Question
What lifestyle changes can maximize my fertility?
Answer:Maintain a healthy weight, stay physically active, eat
a nutritious diet, limit caffeine and manage stress. Regular
sexual intercourse around ovulation is also key to improving
your chances of conception.
6.Question
What are some early signs of pregnancy to look for?
Answer:Common early signs include breast tenderness,
fatigue, slight bleeding or cramping, nausea, increased
urination, food aversions or cravings, headaches, and mood
swings. Missing your period is also a significant indicator.
7.Question
How can tracking my cycle help in conception?
Answer:By tracking your menstrual cycle, you can better
predict your ovulation window, which increases your
chances of conception if you have sex during those fertile
days.
8.Question
What should I do if I suspect I'm pregnant?
Answer:Take a home pregnancy test to confirm. If the test is
positive, contact your care provider for further guidance and
to schedule your first prenatal appointment.
9.Question
What factors should I consider when choosing a care
provider for pregnancy?
Answer:Consider the provider's qualifications, proximity to
your home or work, their availability for questions, the
birthing location, and whether they align with your personal
birthing preferences and needs.
10.Question
How does age affect fertility and pregnancy?
Answer:As women age, particularly after 35, fertility can
decline, leading to longer times to conceive and higher risks
for pregnancy complications, including gestational diabetes,
chromosomal abnormalities, and miscarriage.
11.Question
What steps can older women take to ensure a healthy
pregnancy?
Answer:Seek regular care, maintain a healthy lifestyle, avoid
harmful substances, and stay informed about prenatal testing
options to minimize risks associated with pregnancy at an
older age.
12.Question
Why is it crucial to have regular medical check-ups while
planning for a baby?
Answer:Regular check-ups help ensure your health is
optimized for pregnancy, manage any underlying conditions,
and equip you with the necessary information for a healthy
pregnancy journey.
Chapter 2 | Healthy choices during pregnancy| Q&A
1.Question
What are some healthy lifestyle changes I can make
during pregnancy?
Answer:During pregnancy, it's crucial to eat well,
exercise regularly, and minimize risky habits. Start
by incorporating more fruits, vegetables, whole
grains, and lean proteins into your diet. Stay active
with exercises like walking, swimming, or prenatal
yoga, and aim for at least 30 minutes of activity each
day. Make it a family affair — your healthy habits
can inspire your partner and children to adopt
better lifestyles too!
2.Question
Why is nutrition so important during pregnancy?
Answer:Nutrition during pregnancy lays the groundwork for
your baby's health. Eating well ensures your body gets the
essential vitamins and minerals needed for fetal
development, including iron, calcium, and folic acid. A
balanced diet supports your health too, helping mitigate
common pregnancy ailments like fatigue and nausea,
providing you with the energy to care for your new baby.
3.Question
How much should I be eating during pregnancy,
especially in the first trimester?
Answer:In the first trimester, you won't need significantly
more calories but should focus on the quality of your food.
Aim for a variety of nutritious foods over the course of the
day. It’s more about eating 'for two' in terms of nutrition
rather than quantity — making every bite healthy and
nourishing.
4.Question
What foods should I avoid during pregnancy?
Answer:It's best to avoid seafood high in mercury,
undercooked meats and eggs, processed meats, unpasteurized
dairy, and unwashed produce. These foods can carry risks of
foodborne illness, which can be particularly dangerous
during pregnancy. Always ensure your food is properly
cooked and handled to protect both your health and your
baby's.
5.Question
Why is it important to stay active during pregnancy?
Answer:Staying active during pregnancy can help manage
common complaints like back pain, boost energy levels,
reduce the risk of gestational diabetes, and improve your
overall mood. Regular exercise prepares your body for the
demands of childbirth and can even contribute to quicker
recovery post-delivery.
6.Question
What role do prenatal vitamins play during pregnancy?
Answer:Prenatal vitamins are designed to fill nutritional gaps
and support both your health and your baby's development.
Key nutrients, particularly folic acid and iron, are vital in
preventing birth defects and supporting increased blood
volume. However, vitamins should complement a
well-rounded diet, not replace it.
7.Question
How can I manage weight gain during pregnancy?
Answer:Weight gain during pregnancy is expected, but it’s
essential to keep it within healthy limits. Focus on balanced
nutrition and regular exercise. If you're unsure about how
much weight is appropriate for you, consult your healthcare
provider to develop a tailored plan based on your
pre-pregnancy weight and health.
8.Question
How do I best prepare for my travel while pregnant?
Answer:Traveling during pregnancy can be safe and
enjoyable, especially in the second trimester when morning
sickness usually subsides. Ensure you understand your travel
limits, plan for regular breaks, and stay hydrated. Check with
your obstetrician about any specific travel concerns related to
your health or pregnancy complications.
9.Question
What tips can you offer for getting through morning
sickness?
Answer:To manage morning sickness, consider eating small,
frequent meals, focusing on bland foods, and staying
hydrated. Ginger tea and crackers can also help settle your
stomach. Avoid letting yourself get too hungry, as this can
exacerbate nausea.
10.Question
How can I ensure I'm getting enough calcium during
pregnancy if I'm lactose intolerant?
Answer:If you’re lactose intolerant, there are several ways to
get enough calcium. Consider lactose-free dairy products,
fortified foods like orange juice and cereal, and non-dairy
sources such as leafy green vegetables, sardines with bones,
and certain beans. You may also want to discuss calcium
supplements with your healthcare provider.
11.Question
What do I do if I fall while pregnant?
Answer:If you fall during pregnancy, the protective
structures around your baby usually keep them safe.
However, you should monitor for any unusual symptoms
such as pain, bleeding, or decreased fetal movement. Consult
your healthcare provider to ensure everything is alright.
12.Question
Is it safe to exercise during pregnancy?
Answer:Yes, exercising during pregnancy is generally safe
and beneficial. Regular activity can help with physical
fitness, labor preparation, and emotional well-being. Always
consult your healthcare provider about which exercises are
appropriate for your specific situation.
Chapter 3 | For dads and partners| Q&A
1.Question
How can dads and partners actively participate in their
partner’s pregnancy from the start?
Answer:Dads and partners can actively participate
by getting the pregnancy testing kit, attending
prenatal visits, discussing emotions and experiences
with their partner, talking to and bonding with the
baby, taking childbirth classes together, and
engaging in a healthy lifestyle with their partner.
2.Question
What roles do hormonal changes play in expectant
fathers during their partner's pregnancy?
Answer:Hormonal changes in expectant fathers, such as
increases in prolactin and cortisol and decreases in
testosterone, enhance paternal instincts, help with bonding,
and can lead to sympathy pains similar to what the pregnant
partner experiences.
3.Question
What specific challenges might partners face during the
first trimester of pregnancy?
Answer:During the first trimester, partners may notice their
pregnant partner experiencing constant nausea, extreme
tiredness, mood swings, and food aversions. It's essential for
them to understand that these changes are due to hormonal
transformations occurring in their partner's body.
4.Question
How should partners manage communication and
intimacy during pregnancy?
Answer:Partners should maintain open communication about
expectations, feelings, and experiences related to the
pregnancy. For intimacy, they can explore different forms of
affection when sexual activity is less frequent, such as
cuddling or massage, to stay connected.
5.Question
What preparations should partners make as the due date
approaches?
Answer:Partners should educate themselves about childbirth,
map their route to the hospital, install an infant car seat, keep
a copy of the birth plan, pack necessary bags, and manage
communications effectively during and after labor.
6.Question
What are some common anxieties that new parents may
experience?
Answer:New parents might worry about limited paternity
leave, increased responsibilities with a newborn, disrupted
sleep, less time with their partner, financial strains, and the
possibility of experiencing postpartum depression.
7.Question
How can new parents ease their anxieties and transition
smoothly into parenthood?
Answer:By keeping communication open, building support
networks, preparing financially, and being proactive in their
involvement and roles as parents, they can alleviate anxieties
and adjust to the new responsibilities of parenting.
8.Question
How can partners stay involved after the baby is born?
Answer:Partners can stay involved by spending times at the
hospital with their partner and newborn, sharing
responsibilities like diaper changing and feeding, playing
with the baby, and maintaining emotional intimacy with their
partner through affection and communication.
9.Question
What advice is given regarding sexual activity during
pregnancy?
Answer:Sex is generally safe during pregnancy as long as the
pregnancy is normal and both partners are comfortable.
Partners might need to adjust sexual positions and be
considerate of each other's feelings and physical discomfort.
10.Question
What key message should partners take away regarding
their role in the pregnancy journey?
Answer:Partners should remember that they play a crucial
role in supporting their pregnant partner, preparing for the
arrival of their baby, and maintaining their relationship
throughout the ups and downs of pregnancy and parenthood.

Chapter 4 | PART 2: Pregnancy month by month|
Q&A
1.Question
Why is pregnancy often described as lasting 10 months
instead of 9?
Answer:Pregnancy is typically counted as 40 weeks,
which is divided into 10 calendar months of
approximately 4 weeks each. However, since most
months are slightly longer than 4 weeks, this
sometimes leads to confusion, as a 'month' could
refer to weeks 9 to 12 during the 'third month' of
pregnancy. Therefore, healthcare providers prefer
tracking pregnancy in weeks for precision regarding
the baby’s growth and the timing of essential tests.
2.Question
What should I do if I experience vaginal bleeding or
unusual discharge during pregnancy?
Answer:If you experience any vaginal bleeding or spotting
that persists for more than a day, you should contact your
healthcare provider immediately during the later months of
pregnancy (4-10). For lighter spotting that resolves quickly, a
follow-up within 24 hours is advisable, especially in the early
months.
3.Question
When should I contact my care provider about headaches
during pregnancy?
Answer:Occasional mild headaches can wait until your next
visit. However, if you experience a persistent moderate
headache or a severe headache with dizziness, fainting,
nausea, or visual disturbances, you should contact your care
provider immediately.
4.Question
What signs indicate that I should seek immediate medical
attention during pregnancy?
Answer:You should seek immediate medical attention for
severe bleeding, severe pelvic pain, any degree of pelvic pain
that lasts more than 4 hours, contractions exceeding six per
hour over 2 hours, vomiting accompanied by pain, fever of
102°F or higher, and severe shortness of breath.
5.Question
What are the guidelines for reporting constipation during
pregnancy?
Answer:Mild constipation can be addressed at your next
visit. However, if you experience severe constipation with no
bowel movement for three days, you should contact your
healthcare provider the same day.
6.Question
How can I manage my emotional well-being during
pregnancy, and when is it a concern?
Answer:Experiencing fluctuating moods is common, but if
you find yourself consistently low, losing pleasure in
activities, or having thoughts of self-harm, contact your care
provider immediately. This is crucial to ensure both your and
your baby's mental health.
7.Question
What precautions should I take if I notice swelling or
weight gain?
Answer:Sudden swelling in the hands, face, or feet should be
reported to your care provider the same day, as it could
signal complications. Similarly, if you experience sudden
weight gain, it’s essential to contact your provider promptly.
8.Question
How should I handle fatigue or shortness of breath
during pregnancy?
Answer:If fatigue, weakness, or shortness of breath occurs
occasionally, plan to discuss it at your next appointment.
However, if these symptoms are persistent or severe, you
should contact your care provider the same day.
9.Question
Why is it important to monitor any cravings for non-food
substances during pregnancy?
Answer:Cravings for non-food substances, like clay or dirt,
known as pica, can indicate nutritional deficiencies or
psychological issues. You should discuss these cravings with
your healthcare provider at your next visit to ensure you and
your baby’s health are prioritized.
10.Question
What is the significance of tracking symptoms in relation
to test timing during pregnancy?
Answer:Timely monitoring of your symptoms ensures that
essential tests can be conducted within the appropriate
windows for effective assessment of fetal health. This
attention to detail helps in identifying any issues early and
managing them effectively, enhancing overall pregnancy
outcomes.
Chapter 5 | Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4| Q&A
1.Question
What are the first signs that indicate a person might be
pregnant?
Answer:A missed menstrual period, slight spotting
(implantation bleeding), and home pregnancy tests
showing positive results are common initial signs of
pregnancy.
2.Question
How is pregnancy calculated starting from the last
menstrual period?
Answer:Pregnancy is calculated from the first day of the last
menstrual period, even though conception occurs about two
weeks later.
3.Question
What process occurs immediately after fertilization?
Answer:The fertilized egg, now called a zygote, begins to
divide into two cells approximately 12 hours after
fertilization, continuing to split and multiply as it moves
through the fallopian tube.
4.Question
What hormone is crucial for maintaining a pregnancy
and where is it produced?
Answer:Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) is crucial for
maintaining pregnancy and is produced by the cells of the
developing placenta shortly after fertilization.
5.Question
What emotional changes can a pregnant person expect
during the first month?
Answer:Mood swings and mixed feelings about pregnancy
are common, influenced by hormonal changes, fatigue, and
the stresses of impending parenthood.
6.Question
What are the three layers formed in the developing
embryo, and what do they develop into?
Answer:The ectoderm develops into the nervous system
(including the brain and spinal cord), the mesoderm forms
the heart and circulatory system, and the endoderm becomes
the inner lining of organs such as the lungs and intestines.
7.Question
During weeks 1-4 of pregnancy, what significant changes
occur in a person’s body?
Answer:The body experiences increased blood volume,
tenderness and changes in the breasts, and thickening of the
uterine lining to support the growing baby.
8.Question
Can parents choose the sex of their baby, and what
determines it?
Answer:Parents cannot choose the sex of their baby in most
circumstances; it is genetically determined at fertilization by
the sex chromosomes contributed by the sperm, with X
representing female and Y representing male.
9.Question
What steps should someone take after confirming their
pregnancy with a home test?
Answer:They should schedule a prenatal checkup with a
chosen healthcare provider to assess overall health, identify
risk factors, and establish a prenatal care plan.
10.Question
What lifestyle changes are recommended in preparation
for pregnancy?
Answer:Adopting a healthy lifestyle includes not smoking,
avoiding alcohol and drugs, and taking a daily vitamin
supplement with folic acid to reduce the risk of neural tube
defects.
Chapter 6 | Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8| Q&A
1.Question
What is the miracle happening during the early stages of
pregnancy?
Answer:During the early stages of pregnancy,
specifically from weeks five to eight, the embryo
goes through a miraculous transformation. It starts
from a single-celled zygote and rapidly develops into
a complex organism, forming essential structures
such as the heart, brain, and limbs. This process is
known as differentiation, where cells specialize to
create all the necessary organs and systems, which
feels like a true miracle inside the mother’s body.
2.Question
How can stress affect pregnancy, particularly concerning
miscarriage?
Answer:It's natural to worry about stress and its potential
impact on pregnancy. However, research indicates that stress
does not directly cause miscarriage. Miscarriages are more
commonly linked to chromosomal abnormalities in the
embryo or various medical conditions. Therefore, it's
important to focus on self-care and avoid known risks rather
than stressing over every aspect of life.
3.Question
What major developments occur in the baby from week
five to week eight of pregnancy?
Answer:Between weeks five and eight, significant
developments occur in the embryo. By week five, the embryo
forms the neural tube, which will develop into the brain and
spinal cord. By week six, facial features begin to take shape,
and the heart starts pumping blood. In week seven, the
umbilical cord forms, connecting the embryo to the placenta,
and by week eight, fingers and toes start to appear, and the
heart rate becomes more defined. Overall, this period marks
the foundation of the baby’s anatomy.
4.Question
What are some essential precautions to take during the
critical period of weeks five to ten of pregnancy?
Answer:During weeks five to ten, the embryo is particularly
vulnerable, so it's crucial to avoid teratogens such as alcohol,
certain medications, and recreational drugs, as they can lead
to birth defects. Additionally, be cautious about infections
since some can harm the embryo without the mother even
feeling ill. Maintaining a balanced diet and taking prenatal
vitamins, especially folic acid, is vital to support healthy cell
development.
5.Question
What emotional changes can a pregnant person expect
during the second month?
Answer:In the second month of pregnancy, many experience
a rollercoaster of emotions. Anticipation and excitement
about becoming a parent blend with fears and worries
regarding the pregnancy. This psychological journey can
manifest as anxiety over what could harm the baby or how to
manage new responsibilities. It's essential to communicate
these feelings with a partner or seek support from healthcare
providers.
6.Question
What should be discussed during the first prenatal visit?
Answer:During the first prenatal visit, expect comprehensive
discussions about your medical history, lifestyle habits, and
any concerns regarding the pregnancy. Key topics to cover
include previous pregnancies, current medications, lifestyle
behaviors like diet and exercise, and any family medical
history that could impact the pregnancy. It’s also an
opportunity to address your questions and clarify any fears.
7.Question
How do hormonal changes affect the body during early
pregnancy?
Answer:Hormonal changes during early pregnancy cause a
range of physical effects. Increased levels of hormones like
estrogen and progesterone lead to symptoms such as fatigue,
nausea (morning sickness), breast tenderness, and increased
blood volume, which can cause dizziness and headaches.
These hormones are essential in supporting the pregnancy
and developing the embryo but can also lead to discomfort as
the body adapts.
8.Question
What is coping with morning sickness like, and what are
some strategies to manage it?
Answer:Coping with morning sickness can be challenging,
but many women experience it to varying degrees.
Symptoms often start between weeks five and eight and can
last throughout the first trimester. Strategies for managing
morning sickness include eating small, bland meals, staying
hydrated, and avoiding strong odors. Some women find relief
with ginger products or by adjusting the timing of their
prenatal vitamins.
9.Question
What are the risks and necessities of carrying multiples
during pregnancy?
Answer:Carrying multiples, such as twins or triplets,
increases the likelihood of complications, including preterm
labor, preeclampsia, and the need for a cesarean delivery.
Women expecting multiples should have more frequent
check-ups to monitor their health and the babies' growth.
Proper nutrition and weight management are crucial since the
body's demands will be higher with more than one baby.
10.Question
What emotional support might be beneficial during
pregnancy?
Answer:Emotional support during pregnancy can be
incredibly beneficial. Women should feel encouraged to
discuss their feelings, worries, and concerns with their
partner or trusted friends. This can help alleviate anxiety and
help foster a closer bond. Seeking support from prenatal
classes, counseling, or even support groups specifically for
new mothers can also provide comfort during this transitional
period.

Chapter 7 | Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12| Q&A
1.Question
What emotional changes can women expect during the
early months of pregnancy?
Answer:Women often experience a whirlwind of
emotions as they adapt to their pregnancy. During
the first trimester, feelings of joy and excitement
about the pregnancy may be mingled with worries
about body image, especially as their bodies change
and grow to support the baby. Some women may
feel overwhelmed by the physical discomforts and
hormonal fluctuations that can cause mood swings
and a wave of sensitivity, while others may feel a
sense of purpose and gratitude as they embrace the
journey of motherhood.
2.Question
How does the baby's growth change from week 9 to week
12 of pregnancy?
Answer:By week 9, the baby starts resembling a human,
developing distinct facial features, hands, and feet. By week
10, all vital organs are formed, and the skeletal system begins
to develop. Moving into week 11, the baby's growth
accelerates as it is officially classified as a fetus, tripling in
size by week 20. Finally, by week 12, the baby’s face
becomes more defined, and it measures about 3 inches in
length, marking the end of the first trimester.
3.Question
What are some common physical changes that occur in a
woman's body during the first trimester?
Answer:During the first trimester, women may experience
nausea, breast tenderness, increased fatigue, and frequent
urination. Hormonal changes lead to weight gain, which
usually ranges from 1 to 4 pounds by the end of week 12, and
visible changes in the breasts as they prepare for
breastfeeding. Additionally, fluid retention can cause some
women to experience slightly blurred vision.
4.Question
How can women cope with body image issues during
pregnancy?
Answer:Women can cope with body image concerns by
focusing on the positive aspects of their changes and
recognizing that their bodies are doing important work in
nurturing a new life. Surrounding themselves with supportive
friends and family, engaging in positive self-talk, and
embracing the changes as part of the beautiful journey of
motherhood can help alleviate feelings of dissatisfaction. It’s
also beneficial to communicate openly with partners about
feelings and concerns.
5.Question
What is 'centering pregnancy' and how can it benefit
expectant mothers?
Answer:Centering pregnancy is an innovative approach to
prenatal care where expectant mothers meet in groups to
share experiences and support each other during their
pregnancy journey. This model offers individual time with
healthcare providers while also encouraging collective
learning and emotional support, fostering a sense of
community among participants. The shared experiences and
companionship can significantly reduce feelings of isolation
and enhance the overall prenatal experience.
6.Question
What should women know about sex during pregnancy?
Answer:As long as the pregnancy is normal, women can
engage in sexual activity. It’s common for sex drive to
fluctuate throughout pregnancy, often influenced by physical
discomfort and emotional state. Partners should be adaptive
and communicative about comfort levels, exploring what
positions work best during different stages of pregnancy.
However, it's crucial to seek medical advice if any
concerning symptoms arise, such as bleeding or risk of
preterm labor.
7.Question
What discussions should take place during prenatal
checkups regarding testing?
Answer:Prenatal checkups are an essential time to discuss the
necessity of prenatal testing. Women should talk with their
healthcare providers about recommended tests, their
purposes, and the potential results. It’s important to weigh
the pros and cons of optional tests and understand what their
insurance covers. Open communication will help women feel
informed and comfortable with decisions about screening for
fetal abnormalities.
Chapter 8 | Month 4: Weeks 13 to 16| Q&A
1.Question
What feelings are common during the second trimester of
pregnancy?
Answer:Many women experience relief and
increased energy levels as they move past the nausea
and fatigue of the first trimester. They often feel
more comfortable with sharing their pregnancy
news.
2.Question
What significant developments occur for the baby during
weeks 13 to 16?
Answer:During these weeks, the baby begins developing
essential features such as recognizable eyes, ears, and the
ability to make movements. By week 16, the baby's skeletal
system is forming, muscles are developing, and hormonal
activities begin.
3.Question
What are some common physical changes a pregnant
woman may experience during the second trimester?
Answer:Common changes include nasal congestion,
increased blood volume leading to lower blood pressure,
increased respiratory rate, and potential weight gain of about
2 to 3 pounds. Women may also notice changing breast size
and skin pigmentation.
4.Question
How can a pregnant woman manage discomforts like
heartburn and constipation?
Answer:To manage these discomforts, she can focus on a
nutritious diet, stay hydrated, eat smaller meals, and engage
in gentle physical activity as tolerated to promote digestion.
5.Question
What advice is given for clothing choices during
pregnancy?
Answer:Invest in a few well-fitting maternity clothes that
cater to your growing belly, but avoid buying too many at
once as your size will continue to change. Consider
consignment shops or borrowing from friends.
6.Question
What emotional changes might a pregnant woman
encounter during this time?
Answer:With increased energy and a visible baby bump,
many women feel reminiscent and more connected to their
babies, prompting them to take care of pregnancy-related
tasks they might have previously deferred.
7.Question
What should expectant parents consider when choosing
child care options?
Answer:When selecting child care, parents should consider
budget, personal values regarding care, family dynamics, and
the potential impact on their child's emotional health and
development. Exploring options early is crucial.
8.Question
How can balancing work and family impact a parent's
feelings and the child's well-being?
Answer:Positive feelings about work and home life can
create a beneficial environment for the child. Conversely,
dissatisfaction in balancing both roles may negatively
influence the parent-child relationship.
9.Question
What is the importance of prenatal checkups during this
stage of pregnancy?
Answer:Prenatal checkups are critical for monitoring the
baby's growth, confirming due dates, and managing any
health concerns that may arise, ensuring both mother and
baby's well-being.
10.Question
What is one way a pregnant woman can support her
posture as her body changes?
Answer:Exercises like the back press can help strengthen
core muscles, which support better posture as the body
adjusts to the growing baby.
Chapter 9 | Month 5: Weeks 17 to 20| Q&A
1.Question
What does feeling my baby move for the first time
signify?
Answer:Feeling your baby move for the first time is
a joyful and reassuring moment during pregnancy.
It indicates that your baby is active and healthy
inside the womb, marking the beginning of a more
interactive experience between you and your child.
The movements can often be described as gentle
sensations, like light tickles, which provide comfort
knowing that all is well.
2.Question
What physical changes can I expect in my body during
the fifth month of pregnancy?
Answer:During the fifth month, your uterus expands to your
navel, making your pregnancy visibly noticeable. You may
experience growth in your breasts, increased blood volume
affecting circulation, and some common discomforts such as
back pain and shortness of breath. These changes are all part
of your body adjusting to support your growing baby.
3.Question
How does my baby develop during the fifth month?
Answer:In the fifth month, your baby undergoes significant
growth and development. They start to fill out and become
more baby-like, with fully formed limbs and features. Bone
ossification begins, the baby can hear sounds for the first
time, and they start swallowing amniotic fluid, aiding in gut
and lung development.
4.Question
What is vernix caseosa, and why is it important for my
baby?
Answer:Vernix caseosa is a white, fatty coating that covers
your baby's skin during development. This protective layer
prevents the delicate skin from chapping or scratching and
plays a crucial role in maintaining skin health before birth. It
is a sign of ongoing growth and development as your baby
prepares for the outside world.
5.Question
Should I be concerned about experiencing memory
changes during pregnancy?
Answer:While some women report memory changes during
pregnancy, often termed 'baby brain', the evidence supporting
significant cognitive decline is inconclusive. Researchers
suggest that these changes may be due to sleep deprivation,
hormonal shifts, or the emotional stresses of adjusting to
motherhood. It's important to focus on the positive aspects of
this transition rather than worry about potential cognitive
slips.
6.Question
What should I expect during my prenatal checkup in the
fifth month?
Answer:During your fifth-month prenatal checkup, your
healthcare provider will track your and your baby's health,
checking your weight, blood pressure, and measuring your
fundal height. If your appointment is between 18 to 20
weeks, you may also undergo an ultrasound, which is not
only a chance to evaluate your baby's anatomy and heart rate
but possibly to determine the baby's sex if you're interested.
7.Question
How can I support my baby's development while
pregnant?
Answer:To support your baby’s development, it’s essential to
maintain a balanced diet rich in nutrients, ensure you're
getting enough iron to prevent anemia, stay hydrated, and
engage in safe physical activity. Regular prenatal checkups
and open communication with your healthcare provider about
your experiences and any concerns also contribute to a
healthier pregnancy.
8.Question
Is it normal to experience aches and pains during
pregnancy?
Answer:Yes, experiencing aches and pains during pregnancy
is quite normal due to various bodily changes as your body
adjusts to accommodate a growing baby. Common sources of
discomfort include back pain, groin cramps from stretching
ligaments, and changes in posture and balance. If pain
becomes severe or persistent, it’s advisable to check with
your healthcare provider.
9.Question
How can I bond with my baby while they are in the
womb?
Answer:You can bond with your baby while they are in the
womb by talking, singing, or playing gentle music. As your
baby's hearing develops, they can start to recognize the
sounds of your voice and familiar tunes, creating an early
connection between parent and child.

Chapter 10 | Month 6: Weeks 21 to 24| Q&A
1.Question
What physical changes might I expect during weeks 21-24
of pregnancy?
Answer:During weeks 21-24, you may notice that
your baby bump is more prominent, signaling
visible pregnancy. Your baby is growing rapidly,
passing the 1-pound mark and developing its
digestive system and senses. Physically, your heart
may experience lower blood pressure and your body
will make more blood, potentially causing nasal
congestion or bleeding gums. Your breasts may
begin to produce colostrum, and routine prenatal
visits will check your uterine growth, weight, and
baby's heart rate.
2.Question
How does my baby's development progress during the
second trimester?
Answer:By week 24, your baby's lungs are developing
rapidly, practicing breathing movements, and starting to
produce surfactant, crucial for breathing air after birth. The
baby's reproductive system is also developing, and they are
gaining sensory abilities such as taste and touch. If born
prematurely, by this stage (24 weeks), the baby has a
significant chance of survival, although complications are
common.
3.Question
What are Braxton Hicks contractions and how can I
distinguish them from true labor?
Answer:Braxton Hicks contractions are false labor
contractions that are irregular and generally painless, often
stopping with movement or rest. True labor contractions
become regular, longer, and stronger, continuing regardless
of your activity. The cervix does not change with Braxton
Hicks contractions, while true labor begins to dilate and
efface the cervix.
4.Question
What emotional changes can I expect in my second
trimester?
Answer:During the second trimester, many women
experience improved mood stability as hormone production
begins to regulate. This period may also bring about new
fears regarding childbirth and parenting, which is normal.
Sharing these fears with your partner and healthcare provider
can help alleviate anxiety and provide support.
5.Question
Why is it important to choose a care provider for my
baby before birth?
Answer:Choosing a care provider for your baby ahead of
time ensures you have a trusted medical resource for any
questions or concerns after your child is born. This
preparation helps first-time parents feel more secure and
ready for their new responsibilities.
6.Question
How can childbirth classes help me prepare for delivery?
Answer:Childbirth classes are beneficial for new parents,
especially if you are nervous about labor and delivery. They
provide information on the birthing process, pain
management options, and what to expect during labor,
helping to build confidence and reduce anxiety.
7.Question
What dietary and exercise recommendations are suitable
during this stage of pregnancy?
Answer:Maintaining a balanced diet and regular exercise
within healthy limits is encouraged. Exercise, like pelvic tilts
to strengthen abdominal muscles, can help mitigate
discomfort and prepare your body for labor.
8.Question
What signs should I watch for concerning urinary tract
infections during pregnancy?
Answer:Be aware of increased susceptibility to urinary tract
infections due to physical changes. Symptoms like urgency,
painful urination, or unusual discharge should prompt a call
to your healthcare provider.
9.Question
What are some ways to cope with fears about childbirth?
Answer:Listing and sharing your fears with your partner and
healthcare provider can empower you to face them. Open
communication about concerns helps reduce their power and
fosters a supportive environment.
Chapter 11 | Month 7: Weeks 25 to 28| Q&A
1.Question
What did you learn about your baby's essential needs
during pregnancy?
Answer:During pregnancy, I learned that a baby’s
essential needs boil down to being comfortable,
well-fed, and most importantly, loved. Material
things like trendy strollers or changing pads may
seem appealing to me as a parent, but they are not
what the baby truly cares about.
2.Question
How does a baby's growth change during the seventh
month of pregnancy?
Answer:In the seventh month, particularly from weeks 25 to
28, the baby undergoes significant growth. They add body
fat, their skin becomes smoother and less wrinkled, they
develop features like eyebrows, eyelashes, and their hands
grow fully developed. By week 28, the baby is around 10
inches long and weighs 2 to 3 pounds.
3.Question
What should I expect in terms of my body changes during
these weeks of pregnancy?
Answer:As your belly grows, your uterus expands
significantly, which can cause heart palpitations and
shortness of breath. You may also experience digestive issues
like heartburn or constipation due to crowding in your
intestines. It’s common to gain about a pound a week during
this stage because of the baby, placenta, and amniotic fluid.
4.Question
How can I cope with emotional stress during the last
months of pregnancy?
Answer:To cope with emotional stress as you approach
delivery, find ways to relax and enjoy this time. Journaling,
playing soothing music, talking to your baby, or taking
photos can all be comforting activities. Also, remember to
slow down and embrace the experience before the demands
of new parenthood take over.
5.Question
What are some significant health checks that occur
during this month of pregnancy?
Answer:This month includes prenatal checkups, where your
provider will check your baby's position in the womb. You
may also undergo a glucose challenge test to screen for
gestational diabetes and, if Rh negative, receive an injection
of Rh immune globulin to prevent complications.
6.Question
What are the physical risks associated with preterm labor
and how can I recognize them?
Answer:Preterm labor can lead to the birth of a low-weight
baby, with risks for health problems. Recognize its signs,
which include uterine contractions, low back pain, pelvic
heaviness, spotting, or unusual discharge. If you notice these
symptoms, it’s crucial to contact your care provider.
7.Question
What is the breast-feeding versus bottle-feeding dilemma
many new mothers face?
Answer:Many mothers struggle with the choice between
breast-feeding and formula feeding. Breast-feeding offers
numerous health benefits, but some women may feel
pressured or anxious about it. It is advisable for mothers to
educate themselves on both options and not to feel guilty
about their choices, as there is no 'one size fits all' approach.
8.Question
How can I prepare for breast-feeding before my baby
arrives?
Answer:Consider taking a prenatal class focused on
breast-feeding. Such classes can prepare you for establishing
milk supply, recognizing hunger cues, and addressing
common issues. If you are unsure, you can plan to give
breast-feeding a try shortly after birth and adjust as needed.
9.Question
What changes might I experience regarding my body
image and personal space during pregnancy?
Answer:During pregnancy, personal boundaries may become
blurred as others feel free to touch your belly or comment on
your appearance. You have the right to protect your personal
space. It's normal to feel sensitive about body image, so
focus on your well-being and how these experiences make
you feel.
Chapter 12 | Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32| Q&A
1.Question
What common physical discomforts might I expect in
month eight of pregnancy?
Answer:In month eight, you may experience leg
cramps, pelvic pressure, increased back pain,
swollen ankles, and hemorrhoids. These discomforts
are common as your baby grows rapidly and takes
up more room in your uterus.
2.Question
Why might I feel a change in my baby's movements
during this stage of pregnancy?
Answer:As the baby grows, space in the uterus becomes
tighter. You may notice a decrease in the sharpness or
intensity of kicks and movements, as the baby may not be
able to move as freely. It’s important to monitor these
movements and contact your care provider if you notice a
significant decrease.
3.Question
How can I tell if my baby is moving less than usual, and
what should I do about it?
Answer:To monitor your baby's movements, sit down and
keep a tally of kicks. If you feel fewer than 10 movements in
two hours, contact your care provider. Remember, while
decreased activity can sometimes indicate a problem, it can
also be normal as the baby settles in for the final weeks of
pregnancy.
4.Question
What changes happen to my body during this stage of
pregnancy?
Answer:During this month, you will experience expansion of
your uterus, changes in hair volume due to hormonal shifts,
increased blood volume causing potential swelling or
varicose veins, and possible shortness of breath as your
diaphragm is pushed upward.
5.Question
What should I consider regarding sleep positions as my
belly grows?
Answer:As your belly grows, sleeping face down or on your
back becomes uncomfortable and is not recommended. It’s
best to sleep on your side, with the left side preferred for
optimal blood flow. Using pillows for support can enhance
comfort.
6.Question
What is cord blood banking, and should I consider it?
Answer:Cord blood banking involves collecting and storing
blood from your baby’s umbilical cord, which is rich in stem
cells. You can choose to donate it to a public bank or store it
privately for personal use. While public donation helps those
in need, private banking can be costly and less likely to
benefit your child in the long run.
7.Question
Why is choosing the right car seat important, and what
are some key features to look for?
Answer:Choosing the right car seat is vital for your baby's
safety. Look for seats that fit your child's weight and height,
can be installed correctly, and have features like a five-point
harness, easy-to-remove covers, and a rear-facing installation
for infants.
8.Question
What safety measures should I take when purchasing a
crib for my newborn?
Answer:Ensure that the crib meets current safety standards,
has no broken or missing parts, and that the slats are no more
than 2 3/8 inches apart. Avoid using loose bedding and
ensure the mattress fits snugly to prevent suffocation risks.
9.Question
What emotional changes should I expect as I near the end
of my pregnancy?
Answer:You may experience feelings of anxiety regarding
the upcoming responsibilities of parenthood, especially if it’s
your first child. Focusing on important decisions and
engaging in relaxation techniques can help manage these
emotions.
10.Question
What should I do if I notice signs of preterm labor?
Answer:Be on the lookout for uterine contractions, changes
in vaginal discharge, or any bright red vaginal bleeding. If
you experience six or more contractions in an hour, contact
your care provider immediately, as prompt action can prevent
complications.

Chapter 13 | Month 9: Weeks 33 to 36| Q&A
1.Question
What are the physical changes a mother experiences
during the last month of pregnancy?
Answer:In the last month of pregnancy, mothers
experience significant physical changes as their
bodies prepare for labor and delivery. Common
changes include increased fatigue from carrying the
growing baby, difficulty breathing due to the
upward pressure on the diaphragm, breast
development with growing milk-producing glands,
and softened connective tissues in the pelvic area to
facilitate childbirth. Many mothers also experience
increased urinary urgency and possible vaginal
discomfort as the baby descends further into the
pelvis.
2.Question
How does the baby develop during these weeks of late
pregnancy?
Answer:During weeks 33 to 36, the baby is rapidly gaining
weight, approximately half a pound a week. By the end of
week 36, the baby is nearing full-term, weighing around 5 to
7 pounds. This period is marked by advanced development;
the baby's lungs are maturing, fat accumulation is enhancing
body shape, and sensory responses (like reacting to light) are
becoming more refined. The baby's position also changes as
they prepare for birth, typically settling head-down in the
pelvis.
3.Question
What can parents do to prepare for labor and delivery?
Answer:To prepare for labor and delivery, parents should
consider educating themselves about the birthing process to
alleviate fears and anxieties. Attending childbirth classes,
discussing experiences with other mothers, and preparing a
detailed birth plan outlining preferences for pain relief,
support persons, and procedures can help. Practicing
relaxation techniques and ensuring flexibility in preferences
can also enhance the experience. It’s vital to communicate
openly with care providers about any questions or concerns.
4.Question
What are some exercises that can help prepare for labor?
Answer:Two beneficial exercises for preparing for labor are
Kegel exercises and perineal massage. Kegel exercises
strengthen the pelvic floor muscles, which support the uterus
and bladder and help prevent urinary incontinence. Perineal
massage helps to stretch the tissues around the vaginal
opening, potentially easing discomfort during childbirth.
Performing these exercises regularly can support a smoother
labor experience.
5.Question
How can a birth plan impact the labor and delivery
experience?
Answer:A birth plan allows parents to express their
preferences regarding various aspects of labor and delivery,
including pain management, delivery positions, and
post-birth procedures. It helps facilitate communication with
the healthcare team, enabling them to understand the parents’
desires as well as any concerns they may have. However, it’s
important for parents to remain flexible since medical
situations may require adjustments for the safety of both
mother and baby.
6.Question
What emotions might parents experience during the final
weeks of pregnancy?
Answer:The final weeks of pregnancy can be filled with a
mix of emotions, including excitement, anxiety, and
anticipation. Parents might worry about the health and
welfare of their baby, the pain of childbirth, and upcoming
changes in their lives. This time can also bring reflective
moments as they think about their journey into parenthood,
making it a blend of nervousness and joy.
7.Question
Why is it important to stay connected and informed
during pregnancy?
Answer:Staying connected and informed through discussions
with healthcare providers, attending prenatal checkups, and
engaging in educational activities can empower expectant
parents. Knowledge about pregnancy, labor, and delivery
helps reduce anxiety, allows for better decision-making, and
enhances the overall experience. Being informed also fosters
a supportive environment, as parents feel equipped to handle
challenges and changes during this transformative time.
Chapter 14 | Month 10: Weeks 37 to 40| Q&A
1.Question
What are the key signs that labor is approaching in the
final weeks of pregnancy?
Answer:In the final weeks of pregnancy, several
signs indicate that labor is approaching: 1.
**Lightening**: The baby drops lower into the
pelvis, relieving some pressure on the diaphragm. 2.
**Cervical Changes**: The cervix begins to dilate
and efface, which can start weeks before labor or
just hours before. 3. **Mucous Plug Loss**: The
loss of the mucous plug, which can happen up to two
weeks before labor. 4. **Increased Frequency of
Bursts of Energy**: Some women experience a
'nesting' instinct, where they feel the urge to clean
and prepare for the baby. 5. **Cramping and Back
Pain**: Increasing discomfort and pressure in the
pelvic area. All these signs build anticipation as your
body prepares for birth.
2.Question
How can a woman manage discomfort during the last
month of pregnancy?
Answer:Managing discomfort in the last month can involve
several strategies: 1. **Keep Active**: Engage in light
exercise or activities that help alleviate tension and keep your
mind occupied - reading, organizing baby items, or light
household chores can be helpful. 2. **Relaxation
Techniques**: Practice progressive muscle relaxation,
massage, or deep breathing exercises to ease tension. 3.
**Comfortable Positioning**: Experiment with pillows and
cushions to find supportive positions for sleeping and resting.
4. **Hydration and Nutrition**: Stay hydrated and eat light
meals to minimize digestive discomfort. 5. **Seek
Support**: Lean on your partner, family, or friends for
emotional and physical support.
3.Question
Why is it important to stay calm during labor?
Answer:Staying calm during labor is vital because fear and
anxiety can trigger a stress response that complicates the
labor process. This can lead to increased tension and pain,
referred to as the 'fear-tension-pain cycle.' Relaxation
promotes the release of endorphins, which help reduce pain
and anxiety, thereby potentially leading to a smoother labor
experience. Techniques such as breathing exercises, guided
imagery, and music can create a more peaceful environment,
helping the mother manage discomfort more effectively.
4.Question
What should a pregnant woman do if she notices
decreased fetal movement?
Answer:If a pregnant woman notices decreased fetal
movement, especially fewer than four movements in an hour,
she should contact her healthcare provider immediately.
While it's normal for movements to decrease slightly as the
baby grows and has less space, a significant reduction may
indicate a problem and should be evaluated promptly to
ensure the baby's well-being.
5.Question
What are the recommendations for inducing labor if a
woman is overdue?
Answer:If a woman is overdue, several interventions may be
recommended to induce labor, including: 1. **Membrane
Sweeping**: A procedure where the healthcare provider
separates the membranes from the uterus to trigger labor. 2.
**Cervical Ripening Agents**: Medications can be used to
soften and open the cervix. 3. **Artificial Rupture of
Membranes**: Breaking the water sac to release amniotic
fluid, which can stimulate contractions. 4. **Oxytocin
(Pitocin)**: This synthetic form of the hormone is often
administered to induce contractions. Regular monitoring of
the baby's heartbeat and overall well-being is essential during
this process.
Chapter 15 | Labor and childbirth| Q&A
1.Question
What should I do to prepare for the arrival of my baby in
the weeks leading up to labor?
Answer:1. Review your birth plan: Discuss with
your care provider about labor preferences and
familiarize yourself with standard hospital practices.
2. Preregister at the hospital: Ensure all paperwork
is completed ahead of time to avoid last-minute
stress.
3. Pack your hospital bag: Include essentials like
clothing, toiletries, and items for the baby. Consider
what you might need immediately post-delivery.
4. Try to relax: Engage in activities that bring you
joy or comfort, helping you manage anticipation and
anxiety.
2.Question
What should I expect physically as I near labor?
Answer:Your body will undergo changes such as lightening,
where the baby drops down into the pelvis, creating more
ease in breathing but increased bladder pressure. You may
experience Braxton Hicks contractions, which are warm-up
contractions that prepare your body for labor. Discharge of
the mucus plug (bloody show) may indicate that labor is
approaching.
3.Question
How can I distinguish between false labor and true labor?
Answer:In true labor:
- Contractions become regular, occurring at fixed intervals.
- They grow in intensity and last for longer durations.
- You may also experience cervical changes (effacement and
dilation).
Compared to false labor, where contractions are irregular and
do not lead to significant cervical changes.
4.Question
What are the signs that it's time to go to the hospital?
Answer:You should go to the hospital when:
- Contractions come every five minutes for at least an hour.
- Your water breaks.
- Your contractions become too intense to manage at home.
- You have been instructed by your care provider based on
your unique circumstances.
5.Question
What can my partner do to support me during labor?
Answer:Your partner can:
- Time contractions and help you gauge when to go to the
hospital.
- Keep you calm and provide emotional support.
- Help with relaxation techniques, such as breathing exercises
and massages.
- Take cues from you about what you need, whether it's
water, a cool cloth, or space.
6.Question
What does labor feel like, and how should I cope with it?
Answer:Labor pain is often described as strong menstrual
cramps, tightening, and pressure in the back, abdomen, or
thighs.
Coping strategies include implementing breathing
techniques, changing positions to ease discomfort, and using
relaxation techniques. It's important to stay focused and
remember that each contraction brings you closer to meeting
your baby.
7.Question
What happens immediately after the baby is born?
Answer:Immediately following birth, your baby will be
placed on your abdomen for skin-to-skin contact, which aids
bonding and stabilizes the baby's temperature. The umbilical
cord is clamped and cut. Medical staff will assess the baby's
health, including an Apgar score, and you may begin
breastfeeding shortly after, so long as there are no
complications.
8.Question
How does the placenta deliver after the baby is born?
Answer:After the baby is born, you will continue to have
mild contractions that help to expel the placenta. This
typically occurs within 5 to 30 minutes post-delivery. Your
healthcare provider may apply gentle pressure to help the
placenta detach from the uterine wall.
9.Question
What values should I keep in mind during labor?
Answer:Remember that labor is an individualized
experience, and it’s normal for it to be intense and sometimes
overwhelming. Maintain a positive outlook, trust your body,
and seek support from your partner and healthcare team. It's
also important to prepare for the unexpected and stay
adaptable to changing circumstances, as every labor is
unique.

Chapter 16 | Cesarean birth| Q&A
1.Question
What are some common reasons for a doctor to
recommend a cesarean delivery instead of a vaginal
birth?
Answer:Common reasons include slow or stalled
labor, abnormal fetal heart rate patterns indicating
oxygen supply issues, the baby being in a breech or
transverse position, serious maternal health
problems such as diabetes or heart disease, carrying
multiples (like twins), and complications with the
placenta or umbilical cord.
2.Question
Why might a mother choose to have an elective
C-section?
Answer:Some mothers choose elective C-sections to avoid
the experience of labor, to plan the timing of delivery for
convenience, or due to fear of vaginal delivery
complications.
3.Question
Is there a limit to how many cesarean deliveries a woman
can safely have?
Answer:Most women can safely have up to three C-sections,
but the risk of complications often increases with each
successive surgery. It's essential to discuss individual risks
with a healthcare provider.
4.Question
What are the possible risks of have a C-section?
Answer:Potential risks for the mother include increased
bleeding, infection, injury to bladder or bowel, and
complications from anesthesia. For the baby, risks involve
premature birth, respiratory problems, and rare accidental
injury during surgery.
5.Question
How should a mother prepare for a cesarean birth?
Answer:Preparation may include discussions with healthcare
providers about anesthesia options, having an IV for fluids,
undergoing blood tests, and monitoring vital signs.
Understanding the procedure can help reduce anxiety.
6.Question
How does a C-section affect the early bonding process
between the mother and baby?
Answer:While C-sections are surgical procedures that may
initially delay immediate bonding, efforts are often made by
healthcare providers to allow the mother to hold the baby as
soon as she is stable after surgery.
7.Question
What can mothers do to cope with the emotional impact
of needing an unexpected C-section?
Answer:Mothers can talk about their feelings with partners or
healthcare providers, remind themselves of the importance of
their health and their baby’s health over the delivery method,
and focus on the support they have available.
8.Question
What is vaginal seeding and what are its potential risks?
Answer:Vaginal seeding is the practice of swabbing a
C-section newborn with bacteria from the mother's vagina to
potentially boost the baby's microbiome. However, this
practice can pose serious risks of transferring infections, and
experts currently advise against it until more research is
conducted.
Chapter 17 | Your newborn| Q&A
1.Question
What should I prioritize during my hospital stay after
giving birth?
Answer:Focus on bonding with your newborn and
taking time to recover. Limit visitors and enjoy the
quiet moments with your baby. Utilize hospital staff
for guidance and support as you transition into
parenthood.
2.Question
What might my newborn look like immediately after
birth?
Answer:Your newborn might appear messy with a misshapen
head, puffy eyelids, and possibly covered in vernix. Most
newborns will look bloody, wet, and a bit disheveled due to
the birthing process.
3.Question
How can I handle visitors after I’ve just given birth?
Answer:It's perfectly acceptable to limit visitors and phone
calls to give yourself and your baby the quiet time needed to
bond and recover from the labor and delivery.
4.Question
What are common skin conditions that might affect my
newborn?
Answer:Milia (tiny white pimples), cradle cap (greasy
flakes), salmon patches (red marks), jaundice (yellow skin),
and newborn acne are common and typically resolve on their
own in time.
5.Question
How can I help my newborn adjust to feeding?
Answer:During the first few days, many newborns may not
be eager to feed. Be patient, offer breast or bottle frequently,
and consult your pediatrician if you have concerns about
their nourishment.
6.Question
Why is delayed cord clamping beneficial?
Answer:Delaying cord clamping allows for improved
development by transferring more iron from the placenta and
helping prevent anemia, especially critical for premature
babies.
7.Question
What is the purpose of the newborn screening tests?
Answer:Newborn screenings check for various genetic and
health conditions, allowing for early interventions that can be
crucial for issues that may affect long-term health.
8.Question
What should I know about my baby's appearance during
the first few days?
Answer:Expect some temporary characteristics like a swollen
scalp from delivery pressure, soft spots on the skull called
fontanels, and possibly puffy eyes due to the birthing
process.
9.Question
How can I bond with a premature baby in the NICU?
Answer:Engage in gentle contact through the isolette, hum
lullabies, talk softly to your baby, and practice kangaroo care
by holding your baby skin-to-skin.
10.Question
What are the potential risks and benefits of circumcision
for my newborn boy?
Answer:Circumcision can reduce the risk of urinary tract
infections and certain other conditions. However, it also
carries risks related to the minor surgery itself and is
considered an elective procedure.
Chapter 18 | Taking baby home| Q&A
1.Question
What are the common emotions new parents feel when
bringing their baby home for the first time?
Answer:Excitement and fear are common emotions
for new parents. The anticipation of welcoming a
new family member comes with worries about being
ready for the changes ahead, and it’s normal to feel
overwhelmed by the physical and emotional
adjustments required during the postpartum period.
2.Question
How can parents encourage their newborn’s development
during the first few weeks?
Answer:Parents can encourage their baby's development by
engaging them in face-to-face time to enhance visual
recognition, providing simple objects for the baby to focus
on, and responding to their cues for needs and comfort,
fostering a connection and communication even before they
can speak.
3.Question
What should parents do when their baby is crying, and
they are unsure of the cause?
Answer:When a baby cries, parents should first check for
basic needs such as hunger, diaper changes, or discomfort. If
those are met and the baby continues to cry, parents can try
calming techniques like swaddling, gentle rocking, speaking
softly, or offering a pacifier. If the crying persists, it may be
helpful to take a break, allowing another caregiver to step in.
4.Question
How can new parents manage colic, and what should they
keep in mind during this challenging time?
Answer:To manage colic, parents can experiment with
various calming methods like gentle rocking or white noise
and try to remain relaxed themselves, as tension can
exacerbate the baby's distress. It's essential to remember that
colic is usually temporary and doesn't indicate anything
about the child's long-term temperament.
5.Question
What is the safest sleep position for infants, and why is it
important?
Answer:The safest sleep position for infants is on their backs,
which significantly reduces the risk of sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS). Research supports that babies positioned
this way have a lower likelihood of SIDS compared to those
who sleep on their stomachs or sides.
6.Question
What are some comforting practices parents can use
when caring for a fussy baby?
Answer:Comforting practices include swaddling the baby
snugly, offering gentle rocking, using a soft voice to talk or
sing, and providing skin-to-skin contact while holding the
baby. Creating a calm environment with white noise or
gentle melodies can also help soothe a distressed infant.
7.Question
What dietary preferences do newborns exhibit, and how
does this relate to their feeding routine?
Answer:Newborns naturally prefer sweet tastes, which is
why they respond positively to breast milk, and their feeding
routines can be erratic, typically requiring feedings every two
to three hours. Recognizing cues like sucking motions or
rooting can help parents understand when their baby is
hungry.
8.Question
How should parents approach diaper rash treatment and
prevention?
Answer:To treat diaper rash, it is crucial to keep the diaper
area clean and dry, using gentle cleaning methods during
diaper changes. Preventative measures include changing
diapers frequently, allowing the baby to go without a diaper
for short periods, and using ointments that contain zinc oxide
when irritation appears.
9.Question
Why is it important for newborns to have a consistent
sleeping routine and how can parents establish one?
Answer:A consistent sleeping routine helps newborns
develop healthy sleep habits and aids in their overall growth.
Parents can establish this by maintaining low stimulation
during nighttime feedings and creating a calming bedtime
routine, which signals to the baby that it is time to sleep.
10.Question
What can new parents do to care for their infant's
umbilical cord stump safely?
Answer:To care for the umbilical cord stump, parents should
keep the area clean and dry, avoid submerging the stump in
water until it falls off, and fold the diaper down to expose the
stump to air circulation. If there are any signs of infection,
such as redness or discharge, they should contact a healthcare
provider.

Chapter 19 | Postpartum issues for mom| Q&A
1.Question
What should new mothers expect regarding changes to
their bodies postpartum?
Answer:New mothers can expect that their bodies
will take time to recover after childbirth. It's
unrealistic to expect to immediately bounce back to
pre-pregnancy shape, as the body underwent
significant changes during the 10 months of
pregnancy. Mothers are advised to give themselves
at least a month or more to begin seeing changes,
and to focus on a healthy lifestyle to facilitate
recovery.
2.Question
What are some effective ways to deal with breast
engorgement for breastfeeding mothers?
Answer:To ease engorgement, mothers can express a little
milk either manually or by breastfeeding, use cold
compresses between feedings, and wear a supportive bra.
These steps help relieve discomfort caused by overfilled
breasts.
3.Question
Why is breast self-awareness important during
breastfeeding, and how can mothers perform it
effectively?
Answer:Breast self-awareness is crucial even while
breastfeeding, as the breasts feel different during this time.
To perform effective self-examinations, mothers should
check for lumps immediately after breastfeeding when their
breasts are emptier and more comfortable.
4.Question
How can new mothers handle sore or cracked nipples
while breastfeeding?
Answer:To prevent and treat sore or cracked nipples, mothers
should ensure proper latch techniques, express breast milk to
apply on sore nipples for healing, air dry the nipples
post-feed, and use ointments like lanolin. If issues persist,
consulting a lactation specialist is advisable.
5.Question
What can help alleviate the discomfort of bowel and
urination problems postpartum?
Answer:To alleviate discomfort during bowel movements,
new mothers should eat fiber-rich foods, drink plenty of
fluids, and stay physically active. For urination issues, sitting
in warm water or using a squirt bottle can help ease the
process.
6.Question
What strategies can new mothers employ to manage
fatigue after giving birth?
Answer:New mothers should make time for rest whenever
possible, share baby care responsibilities with partners,
accept help from family and friends, and focus on a nutritious
diet. Engaging in regular exercise can also gradually increase
energy levels.
7.Question
How should new mothers handle hair loss and skin
changes after childbirth?
Answer:New mothers can manage hair loss by maintaining a
healthy diet and possibly continuing vitamin supplements to
support hair regrowth. For skin changes like stretch marks
and discoloration, it's important to know that fading may
occur over time but complete disappearance is rare.
8.Question
What are some signs that a mother might need to speak to
a care provider regarding postpartum mental health?
Answer:If mood changes last longer than two weeks, or if
symptoms include severe anxiety, persistent sadness, or
feelings of hopelessness, the mother should reach out to her
care provider for support. Symptoms like disinterest in the
baby or overwhelming emotional responses also warrant
attention.
9.Question
How can mothers bond with their newborn while
managing daily care tasks?
Answer:Mothers can bond with their newborns by talking,
singing, and cuddling during everyday tasks like feeding and
diaper changes. Making eye contact and responsive
caregiving during these routines can enhance emotional
connection.
Chapter 20 | Managing as parents| Q&A
1.Question
What are some common feelings new parents experience
when bringing home a baby for the first time?
Answer:Common feelings include amazement and
enjoyment, complete love for the child, feelings of
unpreparedness and powerlessness, loss of a
previous lifestyle, frustration with lack of personal
time, and fatigue. It's a mix of emotions as they
navigate this new role.
2.Question
How can new parents simplify their goals during the
transition to parenthood?
Answer:New parents can simplify goals by focusing on one
task at a time, such as making bathing the baby a significant
event for the day, rather than overwhelming themselves with
too many responsibilities. This helps to create a sense of
achievement.
3.Question
What are the benefits of reaching out for help after
bringing a baby home?
Answer:Accepting help from family or friends can relieve
some household burdens, allowing parents to rest and spend
quality time with their baby. It fosters a supportive
environment, making the transition easier.
4.Question
How can humor help new parents cope with the
challenges of parenthood?
Answer:Maintaining a sense of humor helps parents adapt to
their new roles and responsibilities. Finding laughter in
challenging situations can relieve tension, reduce stress, and
help parents feel more connected.
5.Question
What is the significance of setting realistic expectations
before becoming parents?
Answer:Setting realistic expectations helps couples navigate
the stresses of parenthood more effectively. This awareness
of potential challenges contributes to better mutual support
and satisfaction in the relationship.
6.Question
What are some strategies for sharing nighttime baby
duties between partners?
Answer:Partners can work out a schedule to share nighttime
responsibilities, like taking turns with feedings and diaper
changes. This collaboration allows both parents to get
adequate rest and feel involved in parenting.
7.Question
Why is maintaining a personal connection between
parents important after the baby arrives?
Answer:Maintaining a personal connection helps strengthen
the marriage, allowing both partners to support each other
better. Investing time in the relationship fosters a healthier
family environment and sets a positive example for the child.
8.Question
What coping strategies can single parents use to manage
the demands of parenting?
Answer:Single parents can gather support from family and
friends, seek reliable childcare, provide strong role models
for their child, make dedicated time for their child, and
ensure they take time for themselves to recharge.
9.Question
What does the book suggest about financial planning for
raising a child?
Answer:The book emphasizes the importance of budgeting
for the various expenses of raising a child, such as housing,
food, and childcare. It advises parents to look for discounts
and efficient ways to manage these costs.
10.Question
How can new parents embrace the chaos that comes with
having a baby?
Answer:Embracing chaos means accepting that life will be
more cluttered and unpredictable, and it’s okay to let go of
strict organization. Parents should focus on flexibility and
adapt to the new family dynamics.
Chapter 21 | Genetic screening| Q&A
1.Question
Why is it important for expectant parents to consider
genetic screening?
Answer:Genetic screening provides expectant
parents with valuable information about the risks of
genetic disorders in their child. Understanding
potential risks allows parents to make informed
decisions about their pregnancy and future family
planning. As most babies are born healthy,
awareness and preparation can empower parents.
2.Question
What types of genetic screening tests are available before
and during pregnancy?
Answer:Available options include family-history-based
screening, ethnic-based screening, expanded carrier screening
(ECS), and prenatal testing. These tests can identify whether
parents are carriers of genetic disorders and help assess risks
during early pregnancy.
3.Question
How can knowing about a family history of genetic
disorders impact prenatal decisions?
Answer:Knowing about a family history of genetic disorders
can lead parents to pursue specific genetic testing, which
may guide them in making informed choices about
continuing the pregnancy or preparing for potential health
challenges.
4.Question
What is expanded carrier screening (ECS), and how does
it differ from traditional genetic tests?
Answer:ECS is a more comprehensive genetic test that
screens for a wide array of genetic disorders regardless of
family or ethnic background. Unlike more targeted tests,
ECS provides a broader understanding of potential conditions
that may affect a child, though it may not be as accurate for
specific diseases.
5.Question
How should expectant parents emotionally prepare for
the results of genetic screening?
Answer:Parents should acknowledge that genetic testing may
lead to unexpected results concerning their child's health. It’s
essential to have a support system in place and consider
speaking with healthcare professionals to process emotions
and understand implications.
6.Question
What factors should parents consider before opting for
genetic screening?
Answer:Before choosing genetic screening, parents should
consider family history, ethnic background, emotional
responses, insurance coverage, costs, and whether counseling
from a geneticist or counselor could benefit their
decision-making process.
7.Question
How does understanding the types of genetic disorders
influence parenting decisions?
Answer:Understanding the nature of genetic disorders can
help parents weigh their options—such as preparing for
potential health challenges, considering additional testing, or
making informed decisions about future pregnancies.
8.Question
What role do healthcare providers play in genetic
screening during pregnancy?
Answer:Healthcare providers guide expectant parents
through the genetic screening process, offer testing options,
interpret results, and provide essential support for the
emotional challenges that may arise from the testing
outcomes.
9.Question
How can parents cope with the emotional impact of
receiving news about a potential genetic disorder?
Answer:Parents can cope by seeking support from family,
friends, or professionals specializing in genetic counseling.
Engaging with a community or support group can also
provide comfort and shared experiences.
10.Question
What steps should parents take if a genetic disorder is
identified during screening?
Answer:If a genetic disorder is identified, parents should
work closely with healthcare providers to explore the
implications, understand treatment options, and receive
emotional and logistical support for managing the condition.

Chapter 22 | Prenatal testing| Q&A
1.Question
What is the purpose of prenatal testing?
Answer:Prenatal testing serves to determine the
health of the baby while still in the womb,
particularly for parents concerned about genetic
disorders or chromosomal problems due to age or
family history. It provides crucial information that
can help prepare parents for potential health issues
or inform care strategies during and after
pregnancy.
2.Question
What are the two main types of prenatal tests?
Answer:The two main types of prenatal tests are screening
tests and diagnostic tests. Screening tests are noninvasive and
aim to identify pregnancies at higher risk for certain
conditions, while diagnostic tests are usually offered when a
risk is indicated, providing a more definitive diagnosis.
3.Question
Why might parents choose not to have prenatal testing?
Answer:Parents might opt out of prenatal testing if they feel
that the information won't affect their pregnancy decisions or
if they wish to avoid the anxiety that may come from
uncertain results, especially since most tests return normal
results.
4.Question
What factors should parents consider before undergoing
prenatal testing?
Answer:Parents should consider how they will use the
information provided by the tests, the accuracy of the results,
the potential anxiety caused by testing, the risks involved in
the procedures, and the costs or insurance coverage related to
the tests.
5.Question
What information can an ultrasound provide about the
pregnancy?
Answer:Ultrasound can provide vital information such as the
number of babies, gestational age, growth and development
status, heart rate, and any structural abnormalities. It can also
determine the location and health of the placenta and even
the sex of the baby, depending on the baby's position.
6.Question
How accurate is the first trimester combined screening?
Answer:The first trimester combined screening accurately
identifies about 85% of pregnancies with Down syndrome
and has a false-positive rate of approximately 5%.
7.Question
What should parents do if screening tests indicate a
potential problem?
Answer:If screening tests indicate a potential problem,
parents should consult their care provider about the accuracy
of the results and the next steps, which may include more
invasive diagnostic testing or referrals to specialists.
8.Question
What are the potential risks associated with diagnostic
tests like CVS and amniocentesis?
Answer:The potential risks of diagnostic tests like chorionic
villus sampling (CVS) and amniocentesis include
miscarriage (approximately 1 in 455 for CVS and about 1 in
900 for amniocentesis), bleeding, infection, and
complications related to needle insertion.
9.Question
How can prenatal screening benefit parents?
Answer:Prenatal screening can provide peace of mind by
determining the risk of genetic conditions early on, allowing
for informed decisions and preparation for special care if a
condition is detected.
10.Question
What should couples discuss if they receive unexpected
prenatal test results?
Answer:Couples should discuss the accuracy of the results,
implications for the baby's health, possible treatments, and
resources available for support. They might also consider
counseling services to assist them through the
decision-making process.
Chapter 23 | Breast-feeding| Q&A
1.Question
What are the key benefits of breastfeeding for my baby?
Answer:Breastfeeding provides ideal nutrition
tailored for your baby's needs, offering the right
balance of fats, proteins, carbohydrates, vitamins,
and minerals. It contains antibodies that boost your
baby's immune system, helping to reduce the
incidence of common illnesses like colds, ear
infections, and urinary tract infections. Additionally,
breastfed babies tend to have lower risks of asthma,
food allergies, and obesity later in life, along with
potential long-term benefits such as a decreased risk
of heart disease and diabetes.
2.Question
What should I do if I find breastfeeding challenging?
Answer:If you encounter difficulties with breastfeeding,
remember that it’s a learning process for both you and your
baby. Be patient and seek assistance from healthcare
providers, lactation consultants, or support groups. It's also
beneficial to attend a breastfeeding class before delivery to
equip yourself with knowledge and techniques that can ease
the transition.
3.Question
Is it normal to feel overwhelmed when starting to
breastfeed?
Answer:Yes, it is completely normal to feel overwhelmed in
the early days of breastfeeding. Many new mothers
experience this as it can be physically demanding and
requires adjustment. Take it one feeding at a time, be kind to
yourself, and remember that seeking support from friends,
family, or professionals can help ease the anxiety.
4.Question
What are some signs that my baby is hungry?
Answer:Watch for cues from your baby indicating hunger,
such as sucking on their lips or fingers, rooting (turning their
head toward the breast), making small noises, or crying. Each
baby has their own pattern, and learning these signs will help
you respond appropriately and foster a better feeding
relationship.
5.Question
How can I ensure that I’m producing enough milk for my
baby?
Answer:Milk production typically follows the supply and
demand principle; the more your baby feeds, the more milk
you’ll produce. Ensure you breastfeed regularly, recognize
hunger cues, and nurse on both breasts at each feeding. If you
have concerns about your milk supply, consult a lactation
consultant or healthcare provider for guidance.
6.Question
What kind of support can partners provide during
breastfeeding?
Answer:Partners can play a crucial role by helping to create a
comfortable environment for breastfeeding, attending classes,
and assisting with household chores to allow the
breastfeeding mother to rest. They can also help provide
emotional support and encouragement, making the entire
experience more manageable and enjoyable.
7.Question
What should I know about the importance of skin-to-skin
contact after delivery?
Answer:Skin-to-skin contact immediately after delivery
promotes bonding between mother and baby, stimulates
breastfeeding instincts, and can improve breastfeeding
outcomes. If possible, hold your baby against your skin
within the first hour after delivery to encourage the
breastfeeding relationship right from the start.
8.Question
How can I deal with engorgement when my milk comes
in?
Answer:Engorgement occurs when your breasts become
overly full and uncomfortable. To alleviate this, you can
express a small amount of milk by hand or pump to relieve
pressure before nursing. Additionally, applying warmth
before feeding can help facilitate milk flow, and wearing a
supportive nursing bra can provide comfort.
9.Question
What are the benefits of breastfeeding for me as a
mother?
Answer:Breastfeeding can lead to a quicker recovery after
childbirth, as it encourages uterine contractions that help
return your body to its pre-pregnancy state. It may delay the
return of your menstrual cycle, reducing the risk of
unintended pregnancies. Furthermore, breastfeeding has been
linked to lower risks of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, and
even certain heart conditions.
10.Question
When should I introduce a bottle to my breastfed baby?
Answer:It’s generally recommended to wait until
breastfeeding is well-established, usually around 4 to 6
weeks, before introducing a bottle. This helps ensure that the
baby is comfortable breastfeeding and minimizes the risk of
nipple confusion. Once you feel confident with
breastfeeding, introducing a bottle will allow other family
members to participate in feedings.
Chapter 24 | Pain relief during childbirth| Q&A
1.Question
What factors should I consider when choosing pain relief
during labor?
Answer:Consider the method's involvement, its
effects on you and your baby, its onset and duration,
whether it needs prior organization, its
compatibility with other methods, its availability
during labor, and if it can be used at home.
2.Question
How does the presence of a doula contribute to
childbirth?
Answer:A doula provides continuous emotional support,
encouragement, and practical assistance with techniques like
breathing and relaxation. They can mediate between you and
healthcare providers, ensuring your wishes are understood.
3.Question
Is it normal to change your mind about pain relief during
labor?
Answer:Yes, it’s completely normal to reassess your pain
relief preferences as labor progresses. Being flexible helps
you adapt to your unique experience.
4.Question
What role does education about childbirth play in pain
management?
Answer:Education about what to expect during labor can
alleviate fear, which is known to exacerbate pain.
Understanding your pain relief options empowers you to
make informed decisions.
5.Question
How can I find a doula if I want one?
Answer:You can ask your healthcare provider or the birthing
center for recommendations, as some facilities offer doula
services. Additionally, there are numerous online resources
and directories to locate a doula.
6.Question
What is the difference between analgesics and anesthetics
in labor?
Answer:Analgesics reduce pain perception while you remain
conscious, whereas anesthetics block sensation entirely.
Epidurals and spinal blocks are common types of anesthetics
used during childbirth.
7.Question
Why is it important to have a birth plan?
Answer:A birth plan helps articulate your preferences and
instills a sense of control, but it’s essential to remain flexible
as circumstances in labor may require changes.
8.Question
Are doulas essential during childbirth?
Answer:No, but they can be beneficial, especially for
first-time and single mothers. Their support complements
medical staff but is not always necessary.
9.Question
Can I combine different pain relief methods during
labor?
Answer:Yes, many women choose to use a combination of
pain relief methods to tailor their experience to fit their
needs.
10.Question
How might the duration of labor influence pain
management choices?
Answer:Longer labors may lead to increased discomfort, so
women may opt for stronger or immediate pain relief
methods as the labor progresses.

Chapter 25 | Elective cesarean birth| Q&A
1.Question
What are some common fears women have that lead them
to consider an elective cesarean delivery?
Answer:Women may fear labor and delivery pain,
potential damage to the pelvic floor, or issues like
urinary incontinence and sexual problems after
childbirth. The uncertainty associated with
first-time labor and the negative experiences of
others can heighten these fears.
2.Question
How can women make a more informed decision about
whether to have an elective cesarean?
Answer:Women should engage in open discussions with their
healthcare provider about their fears and preferences. It’s
important to educate themselves about the risks and benefits
of both cesarean and vaginal deliveries, weighing the pros
and cons carefully to not let fear dictate their choice.
3.Question
What are the maternal benefits of choosing an elective
cesarean birth?
Answer:Elective cesareans may offer benefits such as
reduced risk of emergency C-sections, decreased postpartum
hemorrhage, avoidance of difficult labor complications, and
scheduling convenience, which can contribute to better
preparation and peace of mind for the mother.
4.Question
What are the potential risks associated with elective
cesarean births?
Answer:Risks include longer hospital stays, higher infection
rates due to surgery, complications from anesthesia, potential
difficulties with initial bonding and breastfeeding, and
long-term complications with subsequent pregnancies.
5.Question
What support should women seek if they had a negative
birthing experience previously?
Answer:Women should discuss their previous negative
experiences with their care providers or trusted support
individuals to understand the reasons for those challenges.
This can help them identify ways to ensure a different, more
positive experience in their current pregnancy.
6.Question
Why is the timing of an elective cesarean important?
Answer:Scheduling an elective cesarean should occur no
earlier than 39 weeks to ensure the baby's health and safety,
allowing for better lung development and reduced risks
associated with prematurity.
7.Question
What should women consider if their healthcare provider
does not support their request for an elective cesarean?
Answer:If a provider does not support the decision for an
elective cesarean, women can ask for a referral to another
provider who may honor their request. It's critical to ensure
any decision made prioritizes the well-being of both mother
and child.
8.Question
How does the decision-making process for elective
cesareans reflect on medical ethics?
Answer:Elective cesareans highlight ethical dilemmas in
healthcare: while women have the right to choose their
birthing methods, providers must weigh the lack of clear
evidence supporting the necessity of the procedure against
their commitment to avoiding unnecessary medical risks.
9.Question
What is a controversial aspect of elective cesarean
deliveries?
Answer:The controversy lies in the debate over a woman's
right to choose versus the medical community's concerns
about elective cesareans lacking clear health benefits and
potentially increasing risks for both mother and baby.
10.Question
What emotional support strategies can women employ to
cope with fears about childbirth?
Answer:Engaging in childbirth education classes, finding
supportive birth partners, and reframing narratives around
childbirth by avoiding negative stories can help reduce
anxiety and fear about the birthing process.
Chapter 26 | Vaginal birth after a cesarean birth|
Q&A
1.Question
What are the potential benefits of choosing a vaginal
birth after cesarean (VBAC)?
Answer:The benefits of VBAC include a generally
safer delivery when compared to a C-section,
reduced risk of complications (such as blood
transfusions, infections, and hemorrhage), shorter
hospital stays, quicker recovery to normal activities,
and a greater sense of involvement in the delivery
process.
2.Question
What are the key risks associated with attempting a
VBAC?
Answer:Key risks of VBAC include the possibility of failing
to deliver vaginally, which may result in complications from
a repeat cesarean, and the rare but serious risk of uterine
rupture, which could be life-threatening for both mother and
baby.
3.Question
How does the type of uterine incision play a role in
deciding if a woman is a candidate for VBAC?
Answer:The type of uterine incision is crucial; a low
transverse incision generally allows for a higher chance of
successful VBAC, while a classical incision is associated
with higher risk and typically rules out VBAC. Women with
an unknown type of incision may still be candidates unless a
classical incision is suspected.
4.Question
What factors might indicate that a woman should not
attempt a VBAC?
Answer:Women should avoid VBAC if they have a prior
classical incision, a history of uterine rupture, certain medical
conditions that preclude vaginal delivery, or access to
facilities unable to perform emergency cesarean deliveries.
5.Question
What tips can help a woman successfully plan for a
VBAC?
Answer:To plan for a successful VBAC, discuss fears and
expectations with your care provider, take VBAC classes
with your labor coach, ensure delivery at a well-equipped
hospital, and maintain a positive mindset while focusing on a
healthy outcome for both mother and baby.
6.Question
Why do many women choose not to attempt VBAC
despite being candidates?
Answer:Many women opt against VBAC due to fears of
prolonged labor that may end in cesarean delivery and
limited access to facilities prepared to handle VBAC safely.
7.Question
How can a woman improve her chances of a successful
VBAC?
Answer:Increasing the chances of a successful VBAC can
include educating herself about the process, maintaining a
healthy lifestyle, having constant monitoring during labor,
and openly communicating with her care provider about her
preferences and concerns.
Chapter 27 | Contraception after delivery| Q&A
1.Question
Why is it important to consider birth control options after
delivery?
Answer:It's crucial to consider birth control soon
after delivery because you can become pregnant
even before your first postpartum period. With
conception occurring again within 18 months, there
are potential health risks for both the mother and
baby, including increased risks for autism, nutrient
depletion, and the challenges of managing infant
care while pregnant.
2.Question
What factors should one consider when choosing a
method of contraception?
Answer:Consider effectiveness, convenience, impact on
breast milk supply (if breastfeeding), potential side effects,
additional health benefits, and partner preferences. Each
method has different effectiveness rates and side effects,
making it essential to align your choice with your lifestyle
and health situation.
3.Question
What birth control methods are available for
breastfeeding mothers?
Answer:Breastfeeding mothers can safely opt for
progestin-only methods like the minipill, hormonal IUDs,
contraceptive implants, and Depo-Provera shots. These
options do not typically affect milk supply and are
recommended over combined hormonal contraceptives,
which may risk reducing milk production.
4.Question
Can breastfeeding prevent pregnancy?
Answer:Breastfeeding can reduce fertility and function as a
form of contraception for up to six months if done
exclusively and on demand. However, this is not a reliable
method as ovulation can occur before the first postpartum
period, making it possible to become pregnant unexpectedly.
5.Question
What should a mother consider regarding her health
when choosing a contraceptive method?
Answer:A mother should evaluate her medical history,
existing health risks (such as blood clotting issues), and any
past complications with pregnancy or contraceptive methods.
This assessment ensures that the chosen contraceptive
method aligns with her health status and minimizes the risk
of adverse effects.
6.Question
How can a woman determine when she is most fertile if
using natural family planning?
Answer:Natural family planning requires tracking ovulation
signs such as calendar days, cervical changes, mucus
consistency, and basal body temperature. Understanding
these signs helps determine fertile and infertile days each
month.
7.Question
What are the advantages of using IUDs as a contraceptive
method?
Answer:IUDs provide long-term, effective contraception
without the need for daily attention or regular doctor visits
once inserted. They can remain effective for several years,
and depending on the type, may also lighten menstrual
bleeding.
8.Question
What role do partners play in the decision-making
process for birth control?
Answer:Partners should communicate openly about their
preferences and concerns regarding birth control methods.
Mutual agreement on contraceptive choices promotes shared
responsibility in managing family planning and enhances
relationship satisfaction.
9.Question
Why is it essential to understand the potential side effects
of different contraceptive methods?
Answer:Understanding side effects allows individuals to
make informed choices about their contraceptive options,
weigh the risks against benefits, and anticipate how these
methods might impact their daily lives, health, and
well-being.
10.Question
What considerations should one make regarding religious
beliefs when choosing contraception?
Answer:A person should weigh how various contraceptive
methods align with their religious or cultural values. Certain
methods may conflict with personal beliefs, making it
important to choose an option that is acceptable within their
ethical framework.

Chapter 28 | PART 5: Symptoms guide| Q&A
1.Question
What can I do to relieve abdominal discomfort during
pregnancy?
Answer:If you experience abdominal discomfort,
consider sitting or lying down to relieve the
pressure. Soaking in a warm bath or practicing
relaxation exercises can also help alleviate
discomfort.
2.Question
When should I seek medical help for abdominal pain?
Answer:You should call your care provider immediately if
the abdominal pain is severe, persistent, or accompanied by
fever, vaginal bleeding, burning with urination,
gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness, or if you begin to have
contractions.
3.Question
What should I do to prevent or manage heartburn during
pregnancy?
Answer:To manage heartburn, eat smaller meals more
frequently instead of large meals, avoid foods that trigger
symptoms (such as fatty or spicy foods), drink plenty of
water, and wait at least one hour after eating before lying
down.
4.Question
How can I cope with fatigue during pregnancy?
Answer:To cope with fatigue, prioritize rest and accept that
you may need more sleep. It's also beneficial to exercise
regularly, eat a balanced diet that includes enough iron and
protein, and ask for help with responsibilities.
5.Question
What are some common symptoms of sciatica during
pregnancy, and how can I relieve it?
Answer:Common symptoms of sciatica include pain,
tingling, or numbness down your leg. To alleviate
discomfort, consider warm baths, alternating between hot and
cold compresses, and regular movement or stretching.
6.Question
What should I do if I notice a significant change in my
baby's movement patterns?
Answer:If you notice any major changes in your baby's
activity level after 22 weeks, such as a significant decrease or
complete absence of movements over 24 hours, contact your
care provider immediately.
7.Question
What should I do to manage food aversions during
pregnancy?
Answer:As long as you are getting the necessary nutrients
from other foods, food aversions are usually not a problem. If
you're averse to healthy foods, find alternatives that can still
provide the necessary nutrients.
8.Question
What are the signs of a potential urinary tract infection
during pregnancy?
Answer:Signs of a UTI include pain or burning when
urinating, a frequent urgent need to urinate, blood in the
urine, strong-smelling urine, mild fever, or bladder
tenderness.
9.Question
How can I implement healthy skin care to manage
pregnancy-related skin changes like acne?
Answer:To manage acne during pregnancy, continue a
regular skincare routine while avoiding irritants like facial
scrubs. Use water-based or noncomedogenic products to
reduce the likelihood of clogged pores.
10.Question
What should I expect regarding mood swings during
pregnancy?
Answer:Mood swings are common during pregnancy due to
hormonal changes and can range from joy to irritability. It's
helpful to maintain a supportive network and practice
relaxation techniques to manage stress.
Chapter 29 | Issues during pregnancy| Q&A
1.Question
What should be my main focus if I am facing a
complication during pregnancy?
Answer:Your main focus should be to listen to your
care provider's advice and ask questions until you
fully understand the complication, its implications,
and how to treat or manage it effectively. This
proactive approach helps in alleviating concerns and
empowers you in your pregnancy journey.
2.Question
What is Rh factor incompatibility, and how is it managed
during pregnancy?
Answer:Rh factor incompatibility occurs when an
Rh-negative mother is pregnant with an Rh-positive baby,
leading to the mother's immune system potentially attacking
the baby’s red blood cells. Management includes
administering Rh immune globulin (RhIg) injections to
prevent antibody formation during the pregnancy and at the
time of delivery, thus ensuring the baby's health.
3.Question
What are the signs of iron deficiency anemia during
pregnancy?
Answer:Signs of iron deficiency anemia can include
excessive tiredness, weakness, pale skin, shortness of breath,
dizziness, heart palpitations, and cravings for non-food items
(pica). If you experience these symptoms, it is important to
speak with your care provider for proper diagnosis and
treatment.
4.Question
How is cervical incompetence treated if detected during
pregnancy?
Answer:Cervical incompetence can be treated by stitching
the cervix closed, a procedure known as cerclage. This
procedure is most effective when performed early in the
pregnancy, ideally before the 20th week.
5.Question
What strategies can help combat depression during
pregnancy?
Answer:Combatting depression during pregnancy often
involves a combination of counseling, behavioral therapy,
and sometimes antidepressant medications that are safe for
use during pregnancy. Building a support network with
friends, family, or community members can also be
invaluable.
6.Question
What should I do if I suspect I am in preterm labor?
Answer:If you suspect you are in preterm labor, it is vital to
contact your healthcare provider immediately. Even if
unsure, it’s better to be evaluated than to take risks, as early
intervention can significantly impact outcomes.
7.Question
What are the potential complications of gestational
diabetes for both mother and baby?
Answer:Uncontrolled gestational diabetes can lead to
excessive birth weight for the baby, leading to delivery
complications, and can increase the risk of preterm birth,
breathing difficulties, and long-term health issues for the
baby, such as obesity and type 2 diabetes. For mothers, it
raises the risk of high blood pressure and the chance of
developing type 2 diabetes later in life.
8.Question
What should I avoid to decrease the risk of listeriosis
during pregnancy?
Answer:To decrease the risk of listeriosis, avoid consuming
unpasteurized dairy products, deli meats that haven’t been
properly stored, and any contaminated foods. Cooking meats
properly and practicing good hygiene can help prevent
infection.
9.Question
What preventive measures can be taken against Zika
virus during pregnancy?
Answer:To prevent Zika virus exposure, avoid traveling to
areas where Zika is prevalent, wear insect repellent when
outdoors, and use protective clothing. If traveling is
unavoidable, take precautions against mosquito bites and
consult your healthcare provider for additional strategies.
10.Question
Why is preparation important during pregnancy,
especially for preterm labor risks?
Answer:Preparation during pregnancy allows for timely and
informed responses to complications such as preterm labor.
Understanding the signs, having a plan of action, and
maintaining regular communication with your healthcare
provider can result in better outcomes for both mother and
baby.
Chapter 30 | Problems of labor and childbirth| Q&A
1.Question
What should I do if complications arise during labor and
I feel out of control?
Answer:In situations where complications occur
during labor, it's crucial to remain as flexible as
possible and try not to panic. Trust in your care
provider and the healthcare team, who are trained
to handle emergencies. Communicate openly—ask
questions about your concerns, possible outcomes,
and the care plan. Together with your provider, you
can decide the best next steps for you and your baby.
2.Question
What are some reasons a healthcare provider might
recommend inducing labor?
Answer:Induction may be recommended for several
important reasons, such as reaching 41 weeks or more of
pregnancy, having broken water without labor starting,
experiencing an infection in the uterus, if the baby shows
reduced activity or growth, or if health complications arise
for the mother, like high blood pressure or diabetes.
Induction is a proactive measure to ensure the health and
safety of both mother and baby.
3.Question
How can labor be induced once it's decided that induction
is necessary?
Answer:Labor can be induced via various methods, often
starting with cervical ripening to soften and open the cervix.
This can involve medications like misoprostol or mechanical
techniques like inserting a balloon catheter. Once the cervix
is ready, methods like breaking the water or administering
oxytocin (Pitocin) may be used to initiate or strengthen
contractions, thereby guiding the labor process towards
delivery.
4.Question
What happens if labor fails to progress and how is it
treated?
Answer:If labor fails to progress, a condition known as
dystocia may arise, which can be due to weak contractions,
an improperly positioned baby, or pelvic constraints.
Treatment may involve medications to stimulate
contractions, breaking the water to encourage labor, or using
oxytocin to help move the labor forward. Continuous
monitoring by the healthcare team allows them to make
timely interventions as needed.
5.Question
Under what circumstances might assisted delivery be
necessary during labor?
Answer:Assisted delivery may be necessary if labor is
prolonged or complications arise during the pushing stage.
This includes situations where the baby is stuck in the birth
canal due to positioning issues, or if the mother's energy is
spent after an extended pushing phase. Instruments like
forceps or a vacuum extractor may be employed to safely
guide the baby out. This decision depends on the baby's
descent and mother's exhaustion.
6.Question
What complications should I be aware of in relation to
the baby's position during labor?
Answer:Issues can arise if the baby is in an abnormal
position, such as facing up (occiput posterior) or being
breech (buttocks or feet first). These positions can cause
prolonged labor or complications, including the risk of cord
compression. Care providers can sometimes attempt to help
reposition the baby manually or advise on a cesarean delivery
if necessary, prioritizing the safety of both mother and baby.
7.Question
What signs indicate that a baby might not be tolerating
labor well?
Answer:A baby is considered to be intolerant of labor if there
are persistent signs of inadequate oxygen supply, often
monitored through changes in fetal heart rate. Indicators may
include a consistently high or low heart rate. Monitoring is
crucial, and if distress is detected, immediate actions, such as
administering oxygen to the mother or preparing for
emergency cesarean delivery, may be necessary.

Chapter 31 | Managing mom’s health concerns|
Q&A
1.Question
How can I effectively manage my pre-existing health
conditions during pregnancy?
Answer:Managing pre-existing health conditions
during pregnancy involves close collaboration with
your healthcare provider. It is essential to discuss
your specific health issues—such as asthma,
diabetes, or depression—with a qualified medical
professional who can tailor a treatment plan that
ensures both your health and the safety of your
baby. For instance, continuing any necessary
medications under your doctor's guidance,
modifying lifestyle choices like diet and exercise, and
attending regular prenatal appointments are vital.
The goal is to maintain control over any condition,
thereby minimizing risks associated with pregnancy.
2.Question
What are the potential risks associated with untreated
asthma during pregnancy?
Answer:Untreated asthma during pregnancy can lead to low
oxygen levels in the mother, which in turn decreases the
oxygen available to the fetus. This can potentially result in
slowed fetal growth, increased risk of preterm birth, and even
brain development issues. Effective management is crucial;
expectant mothers should continue using their prescribed
asthma medications unless advised otherwise by their
healthcare provider.
3.Question
Why is it important to manage depression during
pregnancy?
Answer:Managing depression during pregnancy is crucial as
untreated depression can lead to severe consequences for
both the mother and the baby. Studies show that maternal
depression is linked to preterm birth, lower birth weight, and
developmental issues in children. It’s essential to
communicate with your healthcare provider about any mental
health concerns to ensure appropriate treatment and support,
which is important for both the mother’s well-being and the
baby's health.
4.Question
What steps should I take if diagnosed with gestational
diabetes?
Answer:If diagnosed with gestational diabetes, the first step
is to work closely with your healthcare team to develop a
management plan. This may include monitoring blood sugar
levels regularly, following a balanced diet tailored to
maintain healthy blood sugar ranges, and incorporating
physical activities suited to your condition. In some cases,
insulin therapy may be necessary. It's important to attend all
follow-up appointments to monitor your baby’s growth and
adjust your management plan as needed.
5.Question
How can I prepare for the possibility of cancer treatment
during pregnancy?
Answer:Preparation for cancer treatment during pregnancy
involves a comprehensive discussion with your healthcare
team, including an oncologist and obstetrician. It’s crucial to
understand the specific type of cancer and its treatment
options while considering the timing and effects on both
mother and baby. Your team may discuss scheduling
treatments during trimesters when the risk to the fetus is
lower, and they might suggest options that mitigate risks
such as surgery or chemotherapy. Early intervention often
leads to better outcomes.
6.Question
What should I know about managing high blood pressure
during pregnancy?
Answer:Managing high blood pressure during pregnancy
requires careful monitoring and communication with your
healthcare provider. It's vital to have your blood pressure
checked regularly and to adhere to prescribed medications
that are safe during pregnancy. Lifestyle changes such as a
healthy diet, regular exercise, and avoiding excessive salt can
also help. Be vigilant for any symptoms that might indicate
worsened hypertension, and make sure to discuss your birth
plan to prevent complications during labor.
7.Question
How can women with lupus effectively navigate
pregnancy?
Answer:Women with lupus can navigate pregnancy
successfully by being proactive about their health. This
includes having stable disease management before
conception and during pregnancy, closely monitoring
symptoms, and maintaining regular check-ups with a
healthcare provider experienced in high-risk pregnancies.
Adjustments to medication may be necessary to protect both
mother and baby. Understanding the increased risks, such as
preeclampsia, and utilizing a supportive care team helps
ensure a healthier pregnancy.
8.Question
What role does nutrition play in managing
phenylketonuria (PKU) during pregnancy?
Answer:Nutrition is critical in managing phenylketonuria
(PKU) during pregnancy. Women planning to conceive
should aim to maintain low levels of phenylalanine through a
strictly controlled diet that minimizes protein intake from
sources high in phenylalanine, such as meats and dairy.
Consulting with a dietitian experienced in PKU can help
create a safe eating plan that provides necessary nutrients
while keeping phenylalanine levels in check, thus protecting
the developing baby from potential brain damage.
9.Question
What precautions should be taken for women with sickle
cell disease during pregnancy?
Answer:Women with sickle cell disease should approach
pregnancy with a comprehensive management plan that
involves regular check-ups with healthcare providers who
understand the complexities of their condition. Key
precautions include monitoring for complications such as
infections or crises, maintaining hydration, and possibly
adjusting medications that help manage sickle cell
symptoms. Having a detailed plan for pain management
during labor—which might include a team of specialists—is
also crucial.
10.Question
How can I seek support for postpartum depression?
Answer:Seeking support for postpartum depression involves
several steps. Start by reaching out to your healthcare
provider, who can recommend appropriate treatment options,
such as therapy or medication. Joining support groups for
new mothers or talking with friends and family can provide
emotional backing. Self-care is vital; ensure you're sleeping,
eating well, engaging in light physical activity, and allowing
time for yourself. Remember, asking for help is a strength,
and addressing postpartum depression is essential for both
your well-being and your baby’s.
Chapter 32 | Pregnancy loss| Q&A
1.Question
What should I understand about the emotional effects of
pregnancy loss?
Answer:Pregnancy loss can lead to intense feelings
of grief, confusion, and fear. It's important to
recognize that grieving is a vital and personal
process that varies from person to person. Allow
yourself to feel your emotions fully, whether they
include sadness, anger, or despair, and seek support
from loved ones or professionals if needed.
2.Question
How can I cope with a miscarriage or the loss of a
pregnancy?
Answer:Coping with a miscarriage involves several steps:
acknowledge your grief and give yourself permission to
mourn, consider creating a memento or having a small
memorial to honor your loss, engage in open dialogue with
supportive friends and family, and consult a counselor or
support group to share experiences with others who
understand.
3.Question
What actions can I take after experiencing a miscarriage
to support future pregnancies?
Answer:To support future pregnancies after a loss, follow a
healthy diet, get regular exercise, and ensure you receive
proper preconception and prenatal care. Avoid harmful
substances, such as alcohol and tobacco, and communicate
closely with your healthcare provider about any concerns or
previous pregnancy losses.
4.Question
What is the recovery process like after experiencing a
miscarriage?
Answer:Physical recovery from a miscarriage typically takes
only a few days, with your menstrual cycle expected to return
within four to six weeks. Emotional recovery may take
longer, as grief can resurface on anniversaries or significant
dates. It’s crucial to allow yourself time to heal and seek help
if you find it difficult to cope.
5.Question
Can I expect a healthy pregnancy after experiencing
recurrent miscarriages?
Answer:Yes, many women who have experienced recurrent
miscarriages go on to have healthy pregnancies. It's
important to discuss your history with your healthcare
provider, who may suggest monitoring and special care for
subsequent pregnancies.
6.Question
What are the signs that might indicate the experience of a
stillbirth?
Answer:Signs of a potential stillbirth include noticing a
reduction in your baby's movements. If you observe
decreased fetal movement, it's crucial to contact your
healthcare provider for immediate evaluation to check for the
baby's heartbeat.
7.Question
How do partners often experience and cope with
pregnancy loss differently?
Answer:Partners may process grief differently; one might
want to talk about feelings while the other may prefer
silence. It's vital to communicate openly, listen to one
another, and seek mutual support during this profoundly
challenging time.
8.Question
What steps can I take if I'm considering trying to
conceive again after a pregnancy loss?
Answer:When considering trying to conceive again, it's best
to have a detailed conversation with your healthcare
provider. Discuss emotional readiness, physical recovery,
and any necessary tests or precautions needed to ensure a
healthy pregnancy.
9.Question
What type of support should I seek after experiencing the
loss of a pregnancy?
Answer:Seek emotional support from family, friends, or
support groups for parents who have experienced similar
losses. Professional counseling can also provide a safe space
to explore feelings of grief and develop coping strategies.
10.Question
What should I keep in mind about the timeline for trying
to conceive again after a miscarriage?
Answer:There is no universal 'right' time to try to conceive
again after a miscarriage. It's essential to consider your
physical and emotional recovery and discuss with your
healthcare provider the best timing for your body and
emotional state.

Mayo Clinic Guide to a Healthy
Pregnancy by Myra J. Wick Quiz and
Test
Check the Correct Answer on Bookey Website
Chapter 1 | Preparing to become pregnant| Quiz and
Test
1.It is important to assess your health and meet with
a healthcare provider before attempting to
conceive.
2.All women must be under 30 years old to have a healthy
pregnancy.
3.Tracking menstrual cycles has no effect on increasing the
chances of conception.
Chapter 2 | Healthy choices during pregnancy| Quiz
and Test
1.During pregnancy, it is recommended to consume
double the calories compared to before pregnancy.
2.Eating seafood with high mercury levels, like swordfish
and shark, is safe during pregnancy.
3.Prenatal vitamins are essential during pregnancy to support
dietary needs for nutrients like folic acid and iron.
Chapter 3 | For dads and partners| Quiz and Test
1.Fathers and partners are encouraged to actively
engage in the pregnancy journey, attending
prenatal visits and classes together.
2.It is safe for partners to blow air during oral sex during
pregnancy, regardless of the circumstances.
3.Hormonal changes experienced by men during their
partner's pregnancy can include increased levels of
prolactin and cortisol, leading to sympathy pains.

Chapter 4 | PART 2: Pregnancy month by month|
Quiz and Test
1.Pregnancy is measured in weeks, and it lasts for a
total of nine months.
2.Genetic screening is best carried out after conception.
3.Heavy bleeding during pregnancy should be reported to a
care provider immediately.
Chapter 5 | Month 1: Weeks 1 to 4| Quiz and Test
1.The first month of pregnancy is calculated from
the start of the last menstrual period, with
conception typically occurring about two weeks
afterward.
2.Fertilization occurs only after the zygote implants in the
uterine lining.
3.Emotional fluctuations during early pregnancy are
uncommon and should be addressed immediately by
healthcare professionals.
Chapter 6 | Month 2: Weeks 5 to 8| Quiz and Test
1.During the second month of pregnancy, women
often start to feel more 'pregnant' with symptoms
such as fatigue, frequent urination, and nausea.
2.Miscarriages during the second month of pregnancy are
primarily caused by stress in expectant mothers.
3.Daily vitamin supplements containing at least 400
micrograms of folic acid are recommended to prevent
neural tube defects in the developing baby.

Chapter 7 | Month 3: Weeks 9 to 12| Quiz and Test
1.By the end of month 3, the baby reaches
approximately 3 inches in length and 2 ounces in
weight.
2.Breast changes during pregnancy include a decrease in size
and sensitivity.
3.During month 3, women can expect their emotions to
stabilize and remain unchanged as their body changes.
Chapter 8 | Month 4: Weeks 13 to 16| Quiz and Test
1.During the second trimester, pregnant women
often experience increased energy levels and relief
from first trimester challenges.
2.The baby develops facial expressions and can respond to
light during week 13 of pregnancy.
3.Maternity wear should prioritize comfort and fit due to
physical changes during pregnancy.
Chapter 9 | Month 5: Weeks 17 to 20| Quiz and Test
1.During the fifth month, mothers should start
feeling their baby move, indicating significant
progress in the pregnancy.
2.By week 20, the baby is approximately 12 inches long and
weighs about 5 ounces.
3.It's normal for mothers to experience a decrease in blood
pressure and increased blood production during the fifth
month of pregnancy.

Chapter 10 | Month 6: Weeks 21 to 24| Quiz and
Test
1.At 22 weeks, the baby's senses of taste and touch
are fully developed and matured.
2.By week 24, it is typical for the baby to weigh around 1.5
pounds.
3.It is uncommon for breasts to start producing colostrum by
the 6th month of pregnancy.
Chapter 11 | Month 7: Weeks 25 to 28| Quiz and
Test
1.In Month 7, the baby begins to develop significant
body fat, which makes the skin smoother and more
colorful.
2.By Week 26, the baby's weight averages about 3-4 pounds.
3.Personal boundaries may diminish during pregnancy,
leading to more unsolicited comments on body image from
strangers.
Chapter 12 | Month 8: Weeks 29 to 32| Quiz and
Test
1.During the 8th month of pregnancy, common
discomforts include leg cramps, pelvic pressure,
and back pain.
2.The best sleep position during the 8th month is on your
back for optimal comfort.
3.It's important to monitor baby’s movements and contact
your care provider if there are fewer than 10 movements in
two hours.

Chapter 13 | Month 9: Weeks 33 to 36| Quiz and
Test
1.By week 33, the baby's lungs are maturing and the
chance of survival if born now is increased, but
NICU care may still be necessary.
2.During week 36, the baby is expected to weigh less than 5
pounds as it adds fat and appears plump.
3.Kegel exercises are recommended as a way to strengthen
pelvic floor muscles to assist during and after pregnancy.
Chapter 14 | Month 10: Weeks 37 to 40| Quiz and
Test
1.The average baby weight at Week 40 is around 7½
to 8 pounds.
2.Bright red vaginal bleeding is a normal symptom during
the final month of pregnancy and does not require any
medical attention.
3.Practicing relaxation techniques is encouraged to help cope
with stress and anxiety as labor approaches.
Chapter 15 | Labor and childbirth| Quiz and Test
1.Expectant mothers should not discuss their birth
plan with their care provider as it is not necessary
for labor preparation.
2.Frequent and strong contractions are an indication that it is
time to go to the hospital if they are five minutes apart for
an hour.
3.The second stage of labor is when the cervix begins to
dilate.

Chapter 16 | Cesarean birth| Quiz and Test
1.Cesarean delivery accounts for nearly one-third of
all births in the U.S.
2.A breech position or transverse presentation can often lead
to a vaginal delivery.
3.Vaginal seeding is universally recommended for C-section
babies.
Chapter 17 | Your newborn| Quiz and Test
1.Newborns often have a perfect appearance similar
to babies seen in media.
2.A common skin condition that newborns experience is
miliaria, which causes small white pimples.
3.Newborns typically receive vaccinations and preventive
treatments like Vitamin K after birth.
Chapter 18 | Taking baby home| Quiz and Test
1.Newborns should be bathed daily starting from
birth.
2.Responding quickly to a crying baby is important to meet
their needs.
3.Swaddling a baby involves a complicated process that can
confuse new parents.

Chapter 19 | Postpartum issues for mom| Quiz and
Test
1.Postpartum recovery is typically a quick process
that does not require much patience.
2.Breastfeeding can lead to soreness and cracked nipples,
which can be alleviated by correct latching and gentle
handling.
3.It is not common for new mothers to experience mood
changes after childbirth and any persistent feelings should
not be a cause for concern.
Chapter 20 | Managing as parents| Quiz and Test
1.Bringing home a newborn only brings joy and no
anxiety for new parents.
2.It is important for new parents to prioritize self-care by
eating well, exercising, and getting rest.
3.Maintaining humor and finding joy in challenges is
essential for new parents.
Chapter 21 | Genetic screening| Quiz and Test
1.Genetic screening tests can only be performed
during pregnancy.
2.Expanded Carrier Screening (ECS) screens a limited range
of genetic disorders specific to ethnic backgrounds.
3.Family history is critical for assessing genetic risks in
pregnancy.

Chapter 22 | Prenatal testing| Quiz and Test
1.Prenatal tests are mandatory for all pregnant
women regardless of their health conditions.
2.Ultrasound imaging is only useful for detecting birth
defects later in pregnancy after 20 weeks.
3.Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS) is a prenatal diagnostic
test that samples tissue from the placenta.
Chapter 23 | Breast-feeding| Quiz and Test
1.Breast milk is the preferred option for feeding
babies due to its nutritional benefits and immune
support.
2.The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends starting
complementary foods at three months of age.
3.Infant formula is a safe alternative to breast milk, but cow's
milk is suitable for infants.
Chapter 24 | Pain relief during childbirth| Quiz and
Test
1.Pain relief during labor is the same for every
woman.
2.A doula can provide physical and emotional support during
labor but does not replace the medical team.
3.All pain relief options for childbirth will have coverage by
insurance.

Chapter 25 | Elective cesarean birth| Quiz and Test
1.Elective cesarean delivery is often chosen by
women for convenience and fear of labor.
2.Elective cesareans always result in fewer complications
compared to vaginal births.
3.Discussing motivations and concerns with a healthcare
provider is essential before choosing an elective C-section.
Chapter 26 | Vaginal birth after a cesarean birth|
Quiz and Test
1.VBAC is generally considered safer than a
C-section as it avoids major surgery.
2.A prior classical incision makes it more likely that a
woman is a candidate for VBAC.
3.Women should avoid certain medications that may raise the
risks during VBAC preparations.
Chapter 27 | Contraception after delivery| Quiz and
Test
1.Breastfeeding is a reliable contraceptive method
for preventing pregnancy after delivery.
2.Intrauterine Devices (IUDs) can be used as a form of
emergency contraception after unprotected sex.
3.Only hormonal contraceptives are recommended for
breastfeeding mothers to avoid affecting milk supply.

Chapter 28 | PART 5: Symptoms guide| Quiz and
Test
1.Abdominal discomfort during pregnancy is often
due to the stretching of ligaments and muscles that
support the uterus as it expands.
2.Breast changes during pregnancy do not include colostrum
leakage as the due date approaches.
3.Dizziness and faintness during pregnancy can be caused by
circulatory changes and low blood sugar.
Chapter 29 | Issues during pregnancy| Quiz and Test
1.Rhesus Factor Incompatibility can occur when an
Rh-negative mother carries an Rh-positive baby,
which might harm future pregnancies.
2.Bed rest is the recommended treatment for all pregnancy
complications.
3.Preeclampsia is characterized by high blood pressure and
requires careful monitoring after the 20th week of
pregnancy.
Chapter 30 | Problems of labor and childbirth| Quiz
and Test
1.Induction of labor may be necessary if labor fails
to start naturally after 41 weeks for health
reasons.
2.A baby lying sideways in the womb is typically delivered
vaginally without complications.
3.Continuous fetal heart monitoring is essential to identify
potential signs of distress during labor.

Chapter 31 | Managing mom’s health concerns| Quiz
and Test
1.Asthma management during pregnancy may
include adjusting medications to avoid
complications.
2.It is not necessary to manage diabetes during pregnancy, as
it does not affect the baby's health.
3.Postpartum depression can be effectively managed with
self-care, including physical activity and social
connections.
Chapter 32 | Pregnancy loss| Quiz and Test
1.Miscarriage is the spontaneous loss of a pregnancy
before 20 weeks, affecting approximately 20% of
known pregnancies.
2.Ectopic pregnancy occurs when a fertilized egg implants
inside the uterus.
3.Emotional healing after a pregnancy loss is generally swift
and can be expected to take only a few days to weeks.











Why it's important

Folic acid is a form of folate, which is a B vitamin. It helps your body make new cells (for example, blood cells, brain cells, skin, hair, and nails). Every new cell in the body needs folate.

Folic acid is especially important during early pregnancy, because it helps the neural tube—which becomes the brain and spine—develop. It is the only form of folate that's been shown to help prevent serious birth defects called neural tube defects (NTDs). NTDs are major birth defects of the baby's brain (such as anencephaly) and spine (such as spina bifida). NTDs happen in the first few weeks of pregnancy, often before you know you are pregnant.

Also, about half of all pregnancies in the United States are unintended. By the time you realize you're pregnant, it might be too late to prevent an NTD. That is why getting 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid before and during early pregnancy is important to help prevent NTDs.

Even if you're not planning to become pregnant, getting 400 mcg of folic acid daily is important. Your body uses folic acid to make new cells. Start a healthy habit today by getting 400 mcg of folic acid every day.
Young woman wearing a sweater and taking a vitamin with a glass of water while seating on the couch.
Start getting 400 mcg of folic acid daily today!
Terms to know

The terms folate and folic acid are often used interchangeably. However, folate is a general term used to describe many different forms of vitamin B9. This includes folates occurring naturally in foods and forms that are man-made:

    Dihydrofolate (DHF)
    Tetrahydrofolate (THF)
    5, 10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (5, 10-methylene-THF)
    5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-methyl-THF or 5-MTHF)
    Folic acid

Folic acid is a form of folate that is used in supplements (vitamins) and fortified foods, such as breakfast cereals.
Keep Reading
Folic Acid: Sources and Recommended Intake
Recommendations
General recommendation

If you could become pregnant, the U.S. Public Health Service recommends that you get 400 mcg of folic acid daily to help prevent NTDs.1

In addition, this recommendation is supported by the Institute of Medicine and the US Preventive Services Task Force.
If you've had a previous pregnancy affected by an NTD

If you had a previous pregnancy affected by an NTD and you're planning to become pregnant again, talk with your healthcare provider. The current recommendation is that you should get 4,000 mcg of folic acid daily. You should start taking folic acid 1 month before becoming pregnant again and continue taking folic acid through the first 3 months of pregnancy. If you're not planning to become pregnant, you should get 400 mcg of folic acid daily.
What the research shows

Researchers have studied the link between low folate levels and NTDs since 1965. These studies showed that low levels of folate in the blood increased the risk of NTDs.2

In the 1990s, two large randomized controlled trials showed that taking vitamins with folic acid helped reduce the risk for NTDs. One trial focused on preventing another NTD-affected pregnancy among women who had already had an NTD-affected pregnancy. The other looked at preventing NTDs among women who did not have a history of an NTD-affected pregnancy. Both these studies showed that taking folic acid before and during pregnancy helped lower the chance of having a baby affected by an NTD.

Additional research has looked at

    How taking folic acid daily boosts folate levels in the blood.
    When taking folic acid helps prevent NTDs.
    How adding folic acid to foods affects occurrence of NTDs.

Overall, these studies show that getting enough folic acid can help prevent NTDs. These findings led to and have supported the recommendation that women who can become pregnant should take 400 mcg of folic acid daily.
The Story of Folic Acid Fortification
This documentary short video chronicles the hard work behind folic acid fortification in the United States and its positive effects on the health and well-being of so many children and families.
















    Start a healthy habit: Start getting 400 mcg of folic acid daily, even if you're not planning a pregnancy.
    Plan ahead: If you're thinking about becoming pregnant, start taking folic acid at least 1 month before conception. Continue taking folic acid during pregnancy.
    Check supplement and nutrition labels: Be sure to look at your vitamin and fortified foods labels to ensure they contain folic acid.
    Eat folate-rich foods: Incorporate folate-rich foods into your diet, such as leafy greens, beans, or oranges.
    Consult a healthcare provider: Talk to your doctor about folic acid and any questions you may have.




Overview

Certain vaccines are safe and recommended for women before, during, and after pregnancy to help keep them and their babies healthy. The antibodies mothers develop in response to these vaccines not only protect them, but also cross the placenta and help protect their babies from serious diseases early in life. Vaccinating during pregnancy also helps protect a mother from getting a serious disease and then giving it to her newborn.
Vaccines pregnant women should get

If you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, the specific vaccines you need are determined by your age, lifestyle, medical conditions, travel, and previous vaccinations.

If you are planning a pregnancy, talk with your healthcare provider about getting up to date on all your vaccines. Some vaccines, such as the measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) vaccine, should be given a month or more before pregnancy. Your healthcare provider can help you determine if you need this or any other catch-up vaccine.
Fact

CDC recommends that pregnant women get two vaccines during every pregnancy: the inactivated flu vaccine (the injection, not the live nasal flu vaccine) and the Tdap vaccine.
Flu vaccine

CDC recommends getting the flu vaccine if you are pregnant during flu season. While flu seasons vary in their timing, CDC recommends getting vaccinated by the end of October, if possible. Getting vaccinated later during flu season, though, can still be beneficial. Flu vaccines have been given to millions of pregnant women over the years, and scientific evidence shows that it is safe. Getting the flu vaccine during pregnancy is one of the best ways to protect yourself and your baby for several months after birth from flu-related complications.
Keep Reading:
Flu Vaccine Safety and Pregnancy
Tdap vaccine

Pregnant women are also encouraged to get the Tdap vaccine at any time during pregnancy, but optimally between 27 and 36 weeks of each pregnancy, to protect yourself and your baby from pertussis, also known as whooping cough. This vaccine is recommended during every pregnancy, regardless of how long it has been since you previously received the Tdap vaccine. If you did not get a Tdap vaccine during your pregnancy and have never gotten it, CDC recommends that you get the vaccine immediately after giving birth.
Keep Reading:
Tdap and Pregnant Patients

It is safe for women to receive most vaccines right after giving birth, even while breastfeeding. More information about the safety of vaccines during breastfeeding.
If you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy

Talk with your healthcare provider before getting vaccinated. They can answer questions and offer advice based on your specific health needs.
Vaccines pregnant women should not get

    Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine
    Measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine
    Live influenza vaccine (nasal flu vaccine)
    Varicella (chicken pox) vaccine
    Certain travel vaccines: yellow fever, typhoid fever, and Japanese encephalitis
        Note: these travel vaccines should generally not be given during pregnancy, unless your healthcare provider determines that the benefits outweigh the risks.

Fact

Some vaccines, especially live vaccines, should not be given to pregnant women because they may be harmful to the baby. Keep in mind that vaccine recommendations for pregnant women are developed with the highest safety concerns for both mothers and babies.

If you get any of these vaccines and then find out you are pregnant, talk to your doctor. Further doses of the vaccines, if needed, should be given after you have completed the pregnancy.
Breastfeeding

It is safe to receive routine vaccines right after giving birth, even while you are breastfeeding. However, yellow fever vaccine is not recommended for breastfeeding women unless travel to certain countries is unavoidable and a healthcare provider determines that the benefits of vaccination outweigh the risks. Talk with your provider if you are considering yellow fever vaccine.








Health Effects of Cigarettes: Reproductive Health
At a glance

    Smoking before or during pregnancy can cause serious health problems for the pregnant woman and her baby.
    Secondhand smoke exposure is harmful during pregnancy and after the baby is born.
    Smoking can cause fertility problems for both men and women.
    Quitting smoking at any time during pregnancy can help protect a pregnant woman's health and give babies a healthier start on life.

Pregnant woman lying on sofa at home looking at the ultrasound scan photo of her baby
Smoking and pregnancy

Smoking before or during pregnancy can cause serious problems. Smoking can cause pregnancy complications. It can also harm the health of the pregnant woman and her baby.12 Complications and harms include:345

    Pregnancy complications. Smoking doubles the risk of abnormal bleeding during pregnancy and delivery. This is dangerous for the pregnant woman and her baby. Other complications include the premature rupture of membranes, placenta previa, placental abruption, and ectopic pregnancy.
    Stillbirth. Pregnant women who smoke are at greater risk of stillbirth. Stillbirth is the loss of a baby after the 20th week of pregnancy or during birth.
    Poor fetal growth and low birth weight. Smoking slows a baby's growth before birth. Pregnant women who smoke may deliver a baby that is too small, even after a full-term pregnancy.
    Premature or preterm delivery. Pregnant women who smoke may deliver a baby early, before 37 weeks of pregnancy. Premature babies often have health problems.
    Damage to a baby's developing lungs and brain. Smoking can cause damage that can last through childhood and into the teen years.
    Raising the risk for birth defects. Birth defects include cleft lip, cleft palate, or both. A cleft is an opening in a baby's lip or in the roof of the mouth (palate). A baby with a cleft lip can have trouble eating. The baby will likely need surgery to repair the cleft.
    Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Smoking increases the risk for SIDS, the 'sudden and unexplained' death of a baby.

Smoking and fertility

Smoking can cause fertility problems. Smoking can make it more difficult for women to get pregnant and increases the risk of never becoming pregnant.34

Smoking also damage sperm. It can also lead to impotence (erectile dysfunction, or ED). Both problems can make it harder to father a baby.12
Secondhand smoke exposure and pregnancy

Secondhand smoke exposure is harmful during pregnancy and after the baby is born.3

    Secondhand smoke exposure during pregnancy causes lower birth weight. It may also cause preterm delivery.
    Babies exposed to secondhand smoke are at higher risk for SIDS. They are also at risk for ear infections, lung infections, and decreased lung function.

Quitting smoking can benefit pregnant women and their babies

Quitting smoking is important to have a healthy pregnancy and a healthy baby. The best time to quit smoking is before you try to get pregnant. The next best time to quit is as early in pregnancy as possible. But quitting at any time during pregnancy is helpful. It can help protect a pregnant woman's health and give babies a healthier start on life.5

Quitting smoking:5

    During pregnancy reduces the effects of smoking on the baby's growth.
    Before or during early pregnancy reduces the risk for a small or lower birth weight baby.
    May also reduce the risk of premature or preterm









About Alcohol Use During Pregnancy
Key points

    Alcohol use can be harmful during pregnancy.
    There is no known safe amount of alcohol use during pregnancy.
    There is no safe time during pregnancy to drink alcohol.
    All types of alcohol can be harmful, including red or white wine, beer, and liquor.

More Information
Pregnant woman refusing a glass of wine
Why it's important

Alcohol use during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of miscarriage, preterm birth, stillbirth, and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Alcohol use during pregnancy can cause a range of lifelong behavioral, intellectual, and physical disabilities known as fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs).

During pregnancy, alcohol can pass from the pregnant woman to the fetus and affect its development. Not all babies will be affected by alcohol during pregnancy. However, it is impossible to know which babies will be affected.

There is no safe time for alcohol use during pregnancy. Alcohol can cause problems for the baby throughout pregnancy, including before a woman knows she is pregnant. Alcohol use in the first 3 months of pregnancy can cause the baby to have abnormal facial features. Growth and central nervous system problems (for example, low birthweight, behavioral problems) can occur from alcohol use anytime during pregnancy. The baby's brain is developing throughout pregnancy and can be affected by exposure to alcohol at any time.

It is never too late to stop alcohol use during pregnancy. Stopping alcohol use will improve the baby's health and well-being.
Pregnant woman refusing beer
There is no known safe amount of alcohol use during pregnancy.
Common questions
I just found out I'm pregnant. I've stopped drinking now, but I was drinking in the first few weeks before I knew I was pregnant. What should I do now?

The most important thing is that you have completely stopped alcohol use after learning of your pregnancy. It is never too late to stop alcohol use during pregnancy. Because brain growth takes place throughout pregnancy, stopping alcohol use will improve the baby's health and well-being. Make sure you get regular prenatal checkups.

If you used any amount of alcohol while you were pregnant, talk with your child's healthcare provider as soon as possible and share your concerns.
I drank wine during my last pregnancy and my baby turned out fine. Why shouldn't I drink again during this pregnancy?

Every pregnancy is different. Alcohol use during pregnancy might affect one baby more than another. You could have one child who is born healthy and another child who is born with problems. There is no known safe amount of alcohol use during your pregnancy or when you are trying to get pregnant. There is also no safe time for alcohol use during pregnancy.
What CDC is doing

CDC works with partners across the country to address alcohol and other substance use during pregnancy and FASDs. These scientific findings help inform evidence-based care and resources. They collaborate to provide training to healthcare professionals and disseminate updated information.
Keep Reading:
What CDC Is Doing





Cannabis and Pregnancy
Key points

    Cannabis may be bad for your baby no matter how you use it—this includes smoking, vaping, dabbing, eating or drinking, and applying creams or lotions to the skin.
    If you are using cannabis and are pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding, talk to your doctor.

Potential health effects of using cannabis during pregnancy

Using cannabis during pregnancy may affect your baby's development and put you at risk of pregnancy complications.1

Cannabis use during pregnancy can be harmful to your baby's health.1 The chemicals in cannabis (in particular, tetrahydrocannabinol or THC) pass through your system to your baby and may harm your baby's development.2

Although more research is needed to better understand how cannabis may affect you and your baby during pregnancy, it is recommended that pregnant women do not use cannabis.34

    Some research shows that using cannabis while you are pregnant can cause health problems in newborns, including lower birth weight and abnormal neurological development.1
    Breathing cannabis smoke contains many of the toxic and cancer-causing chemicals found in tobacco smoke.5 THC, the psychoactive or mind-altering compound in cannabis, may also be passed to infants through secondhand smoke.6
    The potential health effects of using cannabidiol (CBD) products during pregnancy are currently unknown.

Cannabis use while pregnant and breastfeeding
Can using cannabis during my pregnancy affect my baby's development after birth?

Although scientists are still learning about the effects of cannabis on developing brains, studies suggest that cannabis use by women during pregnancy could be linked to problems with attention, memory, problem-solving skills, and behavior in their children later in life.789101112
Does using cannabis affect breastfeeding?

The health effects of a breastfeeding woman's use of cannabis on their infant or baby are not yet fully known. We do know that chemicals from cannabis can be passed to a baby through breastmilk.2 THC is stored in body fat and is slowly released over time, meaning a baby could still be exposed even after a woman has stopped using cannabis. Thus, women who are breastfeeding are encouraged to avoid all cannabis use.4













About STIs and Pregnancy
For Everyone
Feb. 12, 2025
Español
Key points

    If you are pregnant, you are not immune to sexually transmitted infections (STIs).
    Pregnant women should ask their doctors about getting tested and treated for STIs.
    STIs can complicate your pregnancy and may have serious effects on both you and the developing baby.

Pregnant woman with healthcare provider
Overview

Pregnancy does not provide women or their babies protection against STIs. Therefore, pregnant women should ask their doctors to test for STIs, as part of their routine care. This is important to prevent serious health complications.
Signs and symptoms

Most STIs have no signs or symptoms. You or your partner could be positive and not know it. The only way to know your status is to get tested.
Risk factors

STIs can harm you and the baby. They can be more serious, even life-threatening, if you come in contact with a STI while pregnant.

If you are diagnosed with an STI while pregnant, your sex partner(s) should be tested and treated.
How it spreads

Pregnancy does not provide protection against STIs.

STIs pass from one person to another through oral, anal, and vaginal sex, as well as genital skin-to-skin contact.
Prevention

Reduce your risk. The only way to avoid getting STIs is to avoid vaginal, anal, or oral sex. If you are sexually active, the following can lower risk of infection.

    Being in a long-term, mutually monogamous relationship
    Having partners who have been tested and are STI negative
    Using condoms, the right way, every time you have sex

Testing and diagnosis

STI testing should a part of your prenatal care plan.

Testing is a vital to prevent health complications. The sooner you begin medical care, the better the health outcomes will be. You may not know if you have an STI, unless you are tested.
Treatment and recovery

Can I get treatment while pregnant?

It depends. Some can be treated/cured with antibiotics that are safe during pregnancy. Others may be treated with antiviral medications or other measures to reduce the risk of passing the STI to the baby.












Preventing Toxoplasmosis
Key Points

    People can take steps to reduce their risk of toxoplasmosis.
    If you are at a higher risk for toxoplasmosis, talk to your healthcare provider.

Prevention tips

Everyone can take steps to reduce their risk of toxoplasmosis.
Food precautions

Use a food thermometer to cook food to a safe internal temperature high enough to kill Toxoplasma. Cooking meat to the USDA recommended internal temperature is the safest method to prevent infection. You cannot tell if food is safely cooked by checking its color or texture (except for seafood). Do not sample meat until it is cooked. The US government and the meat industry continue their efforts to reduce T. gondii in meat.

The USDA recommends the following for meat preparation:
Whole cuts of meat (not including poultry)

    Cook to at least 145° F (63° C) as measured with a food thermometer placed in the thickest part of the meat. Allow the meat to rest* for three minutes before carving or consuming.

Fish with fins

    Cook to at least 145°F or cook until the flesh is opaque and separates easily with a fork.

Ground meat (not including poultry)

    Cook to at least 160° F (71° C). Ground meats do not require a rest time.

All poultry (whole cuts and ground)

    Cook to at least 165° F (74° C). The internal temperature should be checked in the innermost part of the thigh, innermost part of the wing, and the thickest part of the breast. Poultry do not require a rest time.

* According to USDA, "A 'rest time' is the amount of time the product remains at the final temperature, after it has been removed from a grill, oven, or other heat source. During the three minutes after meat is removed from the heat source, its temperature remains constant or continues to rise, which destroys pathogens."
Additional food precautions

    Freeze meat for several days at sub-zero (0° F) temperatures before cooking to greatly reduce chance of infection. Freezing does not reliably kill other parasites that may be found in meat (like certain species of Trichinella) or harmful bacteria.
    Rinse fruit and vegetables under running water.
    Do not drink unpasteurized goat's milk.
    Do not eat raw or undercooked oysters, mussels, or clams (these may be contaminated with Toxoplasma that has washed into seawater).

Cleanliness practices

    Wash utensils, cutting boards, and countertops with hot, soapy water after preparing each food item.
    Teach children the importance of washing hands to prevent infection.
    Wear gloves when gardening or touching soil or sand that cat feces containing Toxoplasma may have contaminated.
    Wash hands with soap and water any time you touch something, including soil or sand, that cat feces containing Toxoplasma may have contaminated.

Environmental practices

    Avoid drinking untreated water.
    Wear gloves when gardening or when touching any soil or sand that may be contaminated with cat feces containing Toxoplasma. Wash your hands with soap and water after gardening or contact with soil or sand.
    Cover outdoor sandboxes.
    Only feed cats canned or dried commercial food or well-cooked table food. Do not feed cats raw or undercooked meats.
    Change the cat litter box daily. The Toxoplasma parasite does not become infectious until 1 – 5 days after a cat shed it in its feces. By cleaning the litter box every day, you remove the feces before they become infectious.
















HIV, Viral Hepatitis, STD & Tuberculosis Prevention in Pregnancy
Key points

    Infections with HIV, viral hepatitis, STIs, and TB can complicate pregnancy and may have serious consequences for a woman, her pregnancy outcomes, and her baby.
    Screening and treatment for these infections, and vaccinations against viruses can prevent many bad outcomes.

More Information
Five pregnant women of different ethnicities.
Overview

Infection with HIV, viral hepatitis or STIs can affect the wellbeing of the mother, the pregnancy outcome, and child.

Screening and treatment for these infections, and vaccinations against viruses, such as hepatitis B and human papillomavirus, can prevent many bad outcomes.

Screening for infections is the first step in accessing the care and treatment needed to prevent transmission of the infection to the infant and to improve the mother's health. Prenatal screening for some infections (HIV, syphilis, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus) is recommended for all pregnant women. Screening for other infections (chlamydia, gonorrhea, and TB) is recommended for some women at risk for infection.

    For additional information on screening for women at higher risk for STIs, visit STDs during Pregnancy – CDC Fact Sheet (Detailed)
    For information about TB diagnosis during pregnancy, visit TB and Pregnancy.

Prevention tips

To protect all women and infants, CDC recommends the following:

Hepatitis B Virus Infection (HBV)

All pregnant women should be screened during each pregnancy, preferably in the first trimester, regardless of vaccination status or history of testing. Pregnant women with a history of appropriately timed triple panel screening and without subsequent risk for exposure to HBV (i.e., no new HBV exposures since triple panel screening) only need hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) screening. Testing pregnant women known to be chronically infected or immune enables documentation of the HBsAg test result during that pregnancy to ensure timely prophylaxis for exposed infants. Newborns of pregnant women who are HBsAg positive should receive the HepB vaccine and HepB immune globulin at birth and complete the HepB vaccine series according to the recommended vaccination schedule.

Hepatitis C Virus Infection (HCV)

All pregnant women should be tested for hepatitis C during each pregnancy. While there is no treatment available to prevent transmission of HCV infection from mother to child, screening for HCV infection during pregnancy allows health care providers to identify infected women who should receive treatment during the postpartum period and infants who should receive testing during a pediatric visit. Identification of HCV infection during pregnancy also can inform pregnancy and delivery management issues that might reduce the risk of HCV transmission to the infant.

HIV

All pregnant women should be tested for HIV as early as possible, preferably at the first prenatal visit. The earlier HIV is diagnosed and treated, the more effective HIV medicines — called antiretroviral therapy or ART — can be at preventing transmission and improving the health outcomes of both mother and child.

Syphilis

All pregnant women should be tested for syphilis at the first prenatal visit, ideally during the first trimester of pregnancy. Among women who may be less likely to receive prenatal care, consider testing at the time of pregnancy testing. The earlier syphilis is diagnosed and treated during pregnancy, the more likely congenital syphilis and its complications (such as stillbirth) can be prevented in the infant. Penicillin G is effective for preventing maternal transmission to the fetus, as well as treating fetal and maternal infection. Pregnant women who live in communities with high rates of syphilis, who are at high risk for syphilis acquisition during pregnancy (e.g., substance use or a new sex partner), or who were not previously tested during the pregnancy should also be screened again at 28 weeks and at delivery.

Tuberculosis (TB)

Healthcare providers should assess all persons, including pregnant women, for risk factors associated with latent TB infection and TB disease. While universal testing for latent TB infection and TB disease is not recommended for pregnant women in the United States, targeted testing for those with risk factors, including people living with HIV infection, people born in high TB prevalence countries, and those who are known contacts of persons with TB disease, facilitates prompt initiation of curative treatment for those with TB disease.




















West Nile and Pregnancy
For Everyone
May 15, 2024
What to know

Women infected with West Nile virus during pregnancy have a low risk of transmitting the virus to their babies.
A pregnant woman holds her belly.
I am pregnant. Am I at higher risk for getting infected with West Nile virus?

No. Pregnant women are not at higher risk for West Nile virus infection.
I am pregnant and was just diagnosed with West Nile virus infection. Is my baby at risk of infection?

A woman who is infected with West Nile virus during pregnancy can possibly transmit the virus to her baby, but the risk is low. Only a few cases of West Nile virus in newborns have been reported. Pregnant women should take precautions to reduce their risk for West Nile virus infection by avoiding mosquitoes, wearing protective clothing, and using insect repellent.
If I am pregnant, should I use insect repellents?

Yes. Protecting yourself from mosquito bites is the only way to prevent infection with West Nile virus. In addition to wearing protective clothing such as long-sleeve shirts and long pants, use insect repellents. Repellents containing active ingredients which have been registered with the EPA are considered safe for pregnant and breastfeeding women. More information about insect repellents is available here.








Type 1 Diabetes and Pregnancy
For Everyone
May 15, 2024
Español
Key points

    Women with type 1 diabetes can have a healthy pregnancy.
    Find out how to boost your health before you become pregnant.
    Have a diabetes management plan, ideally before, during, and after pregnancy, to keep you and your baby healthy.

Pregnant woman looks down at her belly.
Before you get pregnant
Manage your blood sugar

Many doctors recommend that you reach and stay at your A1C goal for a few months before becoming pregnant.
Review your medicines

Some medicines and supplements aren't safe to use while pregnant. Speak with your health care team about each medicine and supplement you take before you get pregnant. Don't stop taking prescribed medicines without talking to your doctor first.
During your pregnancy

During your pregnancy, you and your doctors will adjust your diabetes management plan. If these health care specialists aren't part of your diabetes care team already, consider looking for:

An endocrinologist (a doctor who treats hormone conditions, including diabetes). You may want to find one who specializes in caring for pregnant women with diabetes.

An obstetrician (a doctor who treats pregnant women). Your pregnancy may be considered high risk because of your diabetes. If that's the case, you may want to find an obstetrician who takes care of women with high-risk pregnancies.

A diabetes educator who can help you manage your diabetes during pregnancy.
pregnant woman at the doctor
During your pregnancy, you and your doctors will adjust your diabetes management plan.

Here are a few things to keep in mind:
Keep A1C levels on target

Blood sugar levels that stay high during pregnancy may cause your baby to grow too large or lead to birth defects.
Know your risks

It's important to monitor diabetes complications that could worsen throughout pregnancy, such as vision problems and kidney disease. Other risks include:

    Preeclampsia—high blood pressure that can damage the liver and kidneys.
    Insulin resistance—when insulin is less effective at lowering your blood sugar.
    Miscarriage.
    Macrosomia—a larger than normal baby. This can lead to a more difficult delivery.
    Birth defects that may affect your baby's heart, brain, spine, or organs.

Your insulin needs may change

Your insulin needs can change throughout your pregnancy. Low blood sugar is common in women with type 1 diabetes. Check with your health care team about how much insulin you need and how often you need it.
Consider using a continuous glucose monitor (CGM)

A CGM will help you notice your blood sugar patterns, which can help you stay in your target range. Talk to your doctor to see if a CGM is right for you.
Create a birth plan

Questions to ask:

    If delivering in a hospital, what is the procedure for women who wear an insulin pump?
    Can you keep your CGM on during labor and delivery?
    Who will manage your blood sugar levels during and after labor and delivery?
    What diabetes supplies do you need to pack in your hospital bag?

During and after delivery
Monitoring blood sugar and insulin

Your blood sugar levels may rise during labor. Your blood sugar may drop just before you give birth or immediately after. This can happen whether you have a vaginal delivery or a cesarean (C-section).

Your doctor can help you plan for insulin dose changes and monitoring throughout your delivery and after. You can wear your insulin pump or CGM during delivery.
Monitoring your baby

Babies are closely monitored after birth. Babies of mothers with diabetes can have a drop in blood sugar when they’re born, so your baby will have additional blood sugar testing in the first few days.
Did you know?
People who have a family member with type 1 diabetes have a higher risk of developing it too. Ask your doctor about newborn screening options, and be sure to watch your child for signs and symptoms of type 1 diabetes. There are also screening tests available for early stages of type 1 diabetes before any symptoms appear.
Breastfeeding

Women with type 1 diabetes can breastfeed their babies. Breastfeeding can reduce the risk of asthma, obesity, and type 1 diabetes in babies.

Diabetes may delay your milk from coming in, but that should improve over time.

Breastfeeding is an energy-consuming activity, especially when you’re recovering from giving birth. Be sure to check for low blood sugar before and after breastfeeding or pumping. You’ll also need extra water to stay hydrated. Check with your doctor to ensure all your diabetes medications are safe while breastfeeding and share any other concerns about your blood sugar levels.









Gestational Diabetes
Key points

    Gestational diabetes can develop during pregnancy in women who don't already have diabetes.
    It usually develops around the 24th week of pregnancy.
    Gestational diabetes may not cause symptoms, so testing for it between 24 and 28 weeks is important.

smiling pregnant person sitting down
Overview

Gestational diabetes can develop during pregnancy in women who don't already have diabetes. Every year, 5% to 9% of U.S. pregnancies are affected by gestational diabetes. Managing gestational diabetes can help make sure you have a healthy pregnancy and a healthy baby.
Symptoms

Gestational diabetes often doesn't have any symptoms. If you do have symptoms, they may be mild, such as being thirstier than normal or having to urinate more often. You'll need to be tested to know for sure if you have gestational diabetes.
Risk factors

You're at higher risk for gestational diabetes if you:

    Had gestational diabetes during a previous pregnancy.
    Have given birth to a baby who weighed over 9 pounds.
    Are overweight.
    Have a family history of type 2 diabetes.
    Have a hormone disorder called polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
    Are an African American, Hispanic or Latino, American Indian, Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian, or Pacific Islander person.

Causes

Gestational diabetes happens when your body can't make enough insulin during your pregnancy. Insulin is a hormone made by your pancreas. It acts like a key to let blood sugar into the cells in your body for use as energy.

During pregnancy, your body makes more hormones and goes through other changes, such as weight gain. These changes cause your body's cells to use insulin less well, a condition called insulin resistance. Insulin resistance increases your body's need for insulin.

All pregnant women have some insulin resistance during late pregnancy. However, some women have insulin resistance even before they get pregnant. They start pregnancy with an increased need for insulin and are more likely to develop gestational diabetes.
Prevention

Before you get pregnant, you may be able to prevent gestational diabetes with lifestyle changes. These include losing weight if you're overweight, eating a healthy diet, and getting regular physical activity.

Don't try to lose weight if you're already pregnant. You'll need to gain some weight for your baby to be healthy. Talk to your doctor about how much weight you should gain for a healthy pregnancy.
Prevent type 2 diabetes‎
About half of women with gestational diabetes go on to develop type 2 diabetes. Talk to your doctor about how to lower your risk. Ask how often to have your blood sugar checked to make sure you're on track.
Testing

It's important to be tested for gestational diabetes so you can begin treatment to protect your baby's health and your own.

Gestational diabetes usually develops around the 24th week of pregnancy. You'll probably be tested between 24 and 28 weeks.

If you're at higher risk for gestational diabetes, your doctor may test you earlier. If your blood sugar is higher than normal early in your pregnancy, you may not have gestational diabetes. You may have type 1 or type 2 diabetes instead.
Treatment

You can do a lot to manage your gestational diabetes. Go to all your prenatal appointments and follow your treatment plan, including:

    Checking your blood sugar to make sure your levels stay in a healthy range.
    Being active lowers your blood sugar and makes you more sensitive to insulin.
    Eating healthy food in the right amounts at the right times.

If healthy eating and being active aren't enough to manage your blood sugar, your doctor may prescribe insulin, metformin, or other medication.


















High Blood Pressure During Pregnancy
What to know

Some women have high blood pressure during pregnancy. This can put the mother and baby at risk for problems during the pregnancy.
A doctor measuring a pregnant woman's blood pressure.
What are high blood pressure complications during pregnancy?

High blood pressure can also cause problems during and after delivery.12 The good news is that high blood pressure is preventable and treatable.

High blood pressure, also called hypertension, is very common. Hypertensive disorders affect 5% to 10% of women during pregnancy, which is a 25% increase during the past 2 decades.3

High blood pressure in pregnancy has become more common. However, with good blood pressure control, you and your baby are more likely to stay healthy.

The most important thing to do is talk with your health care team about any blood pressure problems so you can get the right treatment and control your blood pressure—before you get pregnant. Getting treatment for high blood pressure is important before, during, and after pregnancy.

Complications from high blood pressure for the mother and infant can include the following:

    For the mother: preeclampsia, eclampsia, stroke, the need for labor induction (giving medicine to start labor to give birth), and placental abruption (the placenta separating from the wall of the uterus).145
    For the baby: preterm delivery (birth that happens before 37 weeks of pregnancy) and low birth weight (when a baby is born weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces).16 When the mother's blood pressure is high, it is hard for the baby to get enough oxygen and nutrients to grow. This may cause the mother to deliver the baby early.

Learn what to do if you have high blood pressure before, during, or after pregnancy.
What should I do if I have high blood pressure before, during, or after pregnancy?
Before pregnancy

Make a plan for pregnancy and talk with your doctor or health care team about the following:

    Any health problems you have or had and any medicines you are taking. If you are planning to become pregnant, talk to your doctor.7
    Your doctor or health care team can help you find medicines that are safe to take during pregnancy.
    Ways to keep a healthy weight through healthy eating and regular physical activity.17

During pregnancy

    Get early and regular prenatal care. Go to every appointment with your doctor or health care professional.
    Talk to your doctor about any medicines you take and which ones are safe. Do not stop or start taking any type of medicine without talking with your doctor. This includes over-the-counter medicines.7
    Keep track of your blood pressure at home with a home blood pressure monitor. Contact your doctor if your blood pressure is higher than usual or if you have symptoms of preeclampsia.
    Talk to your doctor or insurance company about getting a home monitor.
    Continue to choose healthy foods and keep a healthy weight.8

After pregnancy

    Pay attention to how you feel after you give birth. If you had high blood pressure during pregnancy, you have a higher risk for stroke and other problems after delivery.
    Tell your doctor or call 9-1-1 right away if you have symptoms of preeclampsia after delivery. You might need emergency medical care.910

Resource

For Health Care Professionals: Hypertension in Pregnancy Change Package

Health care professionals can visit Million Hearts® and use the Hypertension in Pregnancy Change Package in their practice. The change package lists process improvements, tools, and resources to help clinicians care for women of reproductive age.
High blood pressure conditions and pregnancy

Health care professionals can make the following diagnoses for pregnancy-related high blood pressure. Your doctor or nurse should look for these conditions before, during, and after pregnancy:

    High blood pressure during pregnancy occurs when a pregnant woman has a blood pressure reading of 140/90 mm Hg or higher in two readings that are 4 or more hours apart.
    Severe high blood pressure during pregnancy occurs when a pregnant woman has a blood pressure reading of 160/110 mm Hg on two or more occasions.
    Chronic hypertension during pregnancy is when a pregnant woman has pre-existing high blood pressure and is diagnosed in the first 20 weeks of pregnancy or if the high blood pressure lasts 12 weeks after the woman has given birth.
    Gestational hypertension is when a pregnant woman who previously had normal blood pressure has high blood pressure during pregnancy.
    Preeclampsia occurs when a woman who previously had normal blood pressure suddenly develops high blood pressure and protein is found in her urine or has other problems after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Women who have chronic hypertension can also get preeclampsia.
    Eclampsia is a medical emergency. Eclampsia is when a pregnant woman with preeclampsia has seizures that have no other cause.

Health care professionals can recommend low-dose aspirin for some pregnant women at higher risk of preeclampsia. If taken at the appropriate time, low-dose aspirin has been shown to reduce the risk of preeclampsia.
Preeclampsia and eclampsia

Preeclampsia is one of the leading causes of pregnancy-related death. It occurs in about 2% to 8% of all pregnancies.3 Some women with preeclampsia can develop seizures. This is called eclampsia, which is a medical emergency.111

Symptoms of preeclampsia include:

    A headache that will not go away.
    Changes in vision, including blurry vision, seeing spots, or having changes in eyesight.
    Pain in the upper stomach area.
    Nausea or vomiting.
    Swelling of the face or hands.
    Sudden weight gain.
    Trouble breathing.

Some women have no symptoms of preeclampsia. That's why it is important to visit your health care team regularly, especially during pregnancy.

You are more at risk for preeclampsia if:1

    This is the first time you have given birth.
    You had preeclampsia during a previous pregnancy.
    You have chronic (long-term) high blood pressure, chronic kidney disease, or both.
    You have a history of thrombophilia (a condition that increases risk of blood clots).
    You are pregnant with multiple babies (such as twins or triplets).
    You became pregnant using in vitro fertilization.
    You have a family history of preeclampsia.
    You have type 1 or type 2 diabetes.
    You have obesity.
    You have lupus (an autoimmune disease).
    You are older than 40.

In rare cases, preeclampsia can happen after you have given birth. This is a serious medical condition known as postpartum preeclampsia. It can happen in women without any history of preeclampsia during pregnancy3 The symptoms for postpartum preeclampsia are similar to the symptoms of preeclampsia. Postpartum preeclampsia is typically diagnosed within 48 hours after delivery but can happen up to 6 weeks later.9

Tell your health care provider or call 9-1-1 right away if you have symptoms of postpartum preeclampsia. You might need emergency medical care.910







Symptoms of Depression Among Women
Key points

    Depression among women is common and treatable.
    If you think you have depression or postpartum depression, seek treatment from your health care provider as soon as possible.

Symptoms
Depression

Depression interferes with daily life and may last for weeks or months at a time. Most people, even those with the most severe forms of depression, can get better with treatment.

How often symptoms occur, how long they last, and how intense they may feel can be different for each person. Symptoms of depression can include a lasting sad, anxious, or "empty" mood. Symptoms can also include a loss of interest in hobbies and activities and a lack of energy. Additional symptoms can be found at Mental Health Conditions: Depression and Anxiety.
Postpartum depression

Postpartum depression is depression that occurs after having a baby.
mother holding an infant with a sad expression
Postpartum depression is more intense and lasts longer than baby blues

Feelings of postpartum depression are more intense and last longer than baby blues. Baby blues describes the worry, sadness, and tiredness many women experience after having a baby. Baby blues symptoms typically resolve on their own within a few days.

The symptoms of postpartum depression may include crying more often than usual, feeling angry, or feeling distant from your baby. Other symptoms may include doubting your ability to care for the baby. Find more symptoms at Moms' Mental Health Matters.
When to talk to your doctor
Treatment

Depression is treatable, and most people get better with treatment. The first step to seeking treatment is to talk to your health care provider. Ask your health care provider for a referral to a mental health professional.

After your visit, follow up on all referrals and treatment. When discussing medications with your provider, let her or him know if you are pregnant, thinking about becoming pregnant, or breastfeeding. You and your provider can decide if taking medicine while pregnant or breastfeeding is right for you. Learn more about seeking treatment for depression.
What to do in a crisis‎‎

If you or someone you know is in crisis, tell someone who can help immediately. In crises, call 911, call or text 988, or call or text 1-833-9-HELP4MOMS.

Call 911 or go to the nearest hospital emergency department for emergency medical treatment.

Call or text 988, or chat at 988lifeline.org to reach the Suicide and Crisis Hotline.

Call or text 1-833-TLC-MAMA (1-833-852-6262) to reach the National Maternal Mental Health Hotline.

Don't be alone. Don't leave another person alone if she or he is in crisis.
Depression rates and risk factors

A CDC study shows about 1 in 10 women of reproductive age in the United States reported symptoms suggesting an episode of recent major depression.
Depression rates during and after pregnancy

An analysis by CDC found the rate of depression diagnoses at delivery increased. The rate was seven times higher in 2015 than in 2000. CDC research shows about 1 in 8 women with a recent live birth reported symptoms of postpartum depression.
Risk factors for depression during and after pregnancy

Previous or family history of depression and little or no social support may put some women at higher risk. Learn more at Moms' Mental Health Matters.






Medicine and Pregnancy: An Overview
For Everyone
Sept. 22, 2025
Español
Key points

    Medicine use in pregnancy is common.
    If you're pregnant or thinking of getting pregnant, talk to your healthcare providers before starting or stopping any medicines.

Woman talking with a pharmacist about medication use
Background

Almost all pregnant women face decisions about taking medicines during pregnancy. Many need to take medicines during pregnancy to treat health conditions. In some cases, avoiding or stopping a medicine during pregnancy may be more harmful than taking it.

And yet, certain medicines during pregnancy can increase the risk for health problems, such as some birth defects, prematurity, or pregnancy loss.
What the data shows

Medicine use during pregnancy is common. About 9 in 10 women report taking some type of medicine during pregnancy. About 7 in 10 report taking at least one prescription medicine. From 1997–2018, use of at least one prescription medication in the first trimester increased 35%.12

Safety information is lacking. Fewer than 10% of medicines approved since 1980 have enough information to determine their safety during pregnancy. This is because pregnant women are often not included in studies that determine the safety of new medicines.3

As a result, women and healthcare professionals have limited information to make informed treatment decisions during pregnancy.
Common questions
Is it safe for me to take medicines before I get pregnant?

Many women need to take medicine to stay healthy before and during pregnancy. If you're planning to become pregnant, you should discuss your current medicines with your healthcare provider. Creating a treatment plan for your health condition before pregnancy can help keep you and your baby healthy.
Should I take acetaminophen during pregnancy?

Some studies of acetaminophen during pregnancy have shown an association with neurological conditions such as autism and ADHD, particularly when taken chronically throughout pregnancy. Although a direct causal relationship between acetaminophen and autism or ADHD has not been established, pregnant women should consider avoiding acetaminophen use during pregnancy as a precaution. Although high fevers have been shown to be associated with birth defects, low grade fevers generally do not require any medication. If a pregnant woman is ever in doubt about fevers, she should consult with a physician about treatment options.
I took a medicine before I knew I was pregnant. What do I do?

If you're concerned about medicines you took before you knew you were pregnant, talk with your healthcare provider about your concerns. Some medicines can be harmful when taken during pregnancy, but others are unlikely to cause harm. If you're concerned and cannot reach your doctor, contact an expert for free at MotherToBaby.
Should I trust online information about medicine safety in pregnancy?

Use caution when consulting online sources about medicine safety in pregnancy. Instead, use the information you find to start a conversation with a healthcare professional. Many websites post lists of medicines that are "safe" to take during pregnancy. However, for many medicines listed, there is not enough scientific evidence of their safety during pregnancy.
Can I take medicine once I'm no longer pregnant? Can I take medicines if I'm breastfeeding?

Although many medications do pass into breast milk, most have little or no effect on milk supply or on infant well-being. For more detailed information, LactRx is an online database that provides information about managing your health conditions while breastfeeding.
What's being done

CDC and partners study medicine use in pregnancy to understand how specific medicines might affect pregnancy. Results of these studies provide better information on the safety and risks of using specific medicines before, during, and after pregnancy.

This information can help you weigh the risks and benefits of medicines. It can also help you and your healthcare provider make decisions about treatment options.
Keep Reading
Research on Medicines and Pregnancy
What you can do

Talk to your healthcare providers before starting or stopping any medicines. Be sure to discuss the following with your healthcare providers:

    All medicines you take, including prescriptions, over-the-counter medicines, herbal and dietary supplements, and vitamins
    Best ways to keep any health conditions you have under control
    Your personal goals and preferences for the health of you and your baby

Pregnant woman sitting on a couch with a bottle of medicine talking with her doctor via a tablet.
Talk to your healthcare provider about any medicines you take






Reproductive Health in Emergency Preparedness and Response
At a glance

CDC advances science and helps the public health system address reproductive and infant health before, during, and after public health emergencies.
Pregnant woman surrounded by symbols representing hurricanes, flooding, wildfires, first aid kit, contact book, doctor, baby sleeping in crib.
Impact of Public Health Emergencies on Reproductive Health

Public health emergencies disrupt lives, families, and communities. These emergencies fall into the following three categories:
Icon of flooded house
Natural disasters (hurricanes, tornadoes, wildfires, floods, earthquakes)
Icon of surgical face mask
Emerging or significant outbreaks of diseases (COVID-19, pandemic influenza)
Icon of nuclear radiation warning symbol
Human-caused disasters (bioterrorist attacks, nuclear/radiation accidents)

Public health emergencies can affect access to medical and social services. They can also increase stress, intensify physical work, and expand caregiving duties. The Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness and Advancing Innovation Act of 2019 classifies pregnant women and infants as a population with special clinical needs.
Responding to Recent Public Health Emergencies
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)

CDC supported multiple efforts to better understand the impact of COVID-19 during pregnancy. Efforts included establishing data systems and research to direct public health action and inform clinical guidance—for the care of affected pregnant and postpartum women and infants. Learn more about clinical guidance and vaccination considerations for women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
Zika Virus

During the 2016 Zika Virus Outbreak, working with CDC subject matter experts and external partners, such as CDC Foundation and Puerto Rico Department of Health, CDC did the following:

    Established surveillance systems to collect information on pregnant women infected with Zika virus in the United States and associated territories.
    Implemented the PRAMS Zika Postpartum Emergency Response Surveys (PRAMS-ZPER).
    Used the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) to assess contraceptive use Contraceptive Assessment in Puerto Rico during Zika (CAPRZ)—2016.
    Established the Zika Contraception Access Network (Z-CAN) and developed a toolkit for increasing contraceptive access during public health emergencies.

Ebola Virus Disease (EVD)

During the 2014–2016 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa, CDC collaborated across subject matter areas. This resulted in guidance documents on breastfeeding and recommendations for screening and treating pregnant women with suspected or confirmed Ebola virus.

CDC provided technical support for Rapid Ebola Preparedness visits to US hospitals preparing for possible Ebola-infected obstetric cases. CDC also addressed inquiries from health care providers and the general public. Learn more about CDC's Maternal Health Response to 2014–16 Ebola outbreak.
Pandemic Influenza

During the 2009 H1N1 Pandemic response, CDC's Maternal Health Team developed nine maternal health guidance documents and addressed more than 4,600 maternal health inquiries. See a Supplement to the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology (AJOG) to learn more about lessons learned during the Pandemic H1N1 response and special considerations for pregnant women and newborns.







About Reproductive Health in the Workplace
Key points

    Workplace exposures, conditions, and tasks can affect workers' sexual and reproductive health.
    Some workplace hazards can affect workers' sex hormones, their fertility, the health of their unborn children, and their children's healthy development.
    Learn how employers and workers can reduce reproductive hazards in the workplace.

Pregnant healthcare worker reading a chart on a clipboard.
Overview
Diverse group of male and female workers.
Reproductive hazards matter all the time, for all workers.

Many things can impact sexual and reproductive health, including hazards in the workplace. Some workplace hazards can affect a worker's:

    Sex hormones
    Fertility
    Health of unborn children
    Children's development

Whether a worker is considering having children now or not, reproductive hazards matter all the time, for all workers.

Many chemicals in the workplace haven't been fully tested to see if they can cause reproductive problems.
Work can impact family health

Workers can carry chemicals home on their skin, hair, clothes, and shoes. Some of these can harm the health of children and other people in the household. Some chemicals can also concentrate in semen, so can cause exposure to a sexual partner and affect their health.

Breastfeeding is very good for babies' health, and most working mothers can safely breastfeed their babies. Although not common, there are some chemicals that can get into breast milk and possibly harm a baby. These include lead and other heavy metals and some radioactive isotopes used in hospitals for radiation therapy, like Iodine-131. People who are breastfeeding and work with these chemicals should talk with their doctors about how to safely breastfeed.
Work can impact hormone and sexual function

Sexual function and fertility can be affected by workplace hazards regardless of a worker's sex or reproductive stage. Hazards that affect sex hormones can have wide-ranging effects on a person's overall health. Sperm, semen, or menstrual cycles can also be affected by workplace hazards.
Work can impact pregnancy

Changes in a pregnant woman's metabolism increase how quickly they absorb some chemicals (e.g. some metals).

Because of physical changes, personal protective equipment (like lab coats or respirators) might stop fitting a pregnant woman properly.

Pregnancy causes changes in the immune system and lungs that can alter a person's risk of workplace illness.

Pregnancy causes changes in the ligaments, and changing body size and shape changes a person's posture. This could alter a worker's risk of injuries at work.

A fetus might be more vulnerable to some chemicals because of its rapid growth and development, especially early in pregnancy. Exposure to some workplace hazards during pregnancy has been linked to:

    Babies born too soon or too small
    Birth defects
    Miscarriage
    Other adverse pregnancy outcomes

How workers are exposed
Chemical hazards at work

Chemicals at work can enter workers' body in three ways:

    In the air
    Through skin contact, especially if the skin is not intact
    By ingesting (swallowing)

Whether or not a chemical exposure causes health problems depends on:

    What the chemical is
    How the chemical enters the body
    How long or how often a person is exposed to the chemical
    How much of the chemical a person is exposed to
    How each person reacts to the chemical

Other workplace hazards

Some job exposures are not chemicals, but they may still affect workers' reproductive health. Some examples of these exposures are:

    Radiation
    Loud noise
    Infectious diseases
    Long working hours, shiftwork, or irregular work schedules
    Lifting, bending, and standing

What workers can do

Even if your job involves some hazards, there are things you can do to protect yourself and stay safe at work. Some actions include:

    Asking questions about potential reproductive hazards in your job
    Reducing your exposure to specific hazards
    Avoiding taking home potential hazards from work
    Talking to your doctor or a healthcare professional
    Contact CDC-INFO

Keep Reading:
How Workers Can Protect Their Reproductive Health
What employers can do

Employers can help keep workers and their families safe by taking steps to protect them from reproductive hazards.
Keep Reading:
How Employers Can Reduce Workplace Reproductive Hazards
Learn more about workplace reproductive hazards

Read about examples of jobs and associated reproductive hazards.

Learn about specific hazards and your reproductive health.
Resources
Resources on fertility, pregnancy, and breastfeeding:

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Public Health Action Plan for the Detection, Prevention and Management of Infertility.

CDC resources on maternal and infant health.

CDC resources on breastfeeding.

Know your rights about nursing breaks at work









Pregnancy
Key points

If you are pregnant, speak with a medical professional as soon as it is safe. Radiation can have serious effects on your baby, even if you feel healthy. This includes medical problems like stunted growth and cancer, or possibly a miscarriage.
Illustration of a child with their pregnant mother
Radiation emergencies and pregnancy

After a radiation emergency, follow instructions from emergency officials and seek medical attention as soon as emergency officials say it is safe to do so.

Prenatal radiation exposure occurs when a pregnant woman's abdomen is exposed to radiation.

For most radiation exposures, the radiation dose to the fetus is lower than the dose to the pregnant woman. The abdomen partially protects the fetus from radiation sources that are outside the body.

If you swallow or breath in radioactive materials, these may be absorbed into your bloodstream. If you are pregnant, radioactive materials may pass from the blood through the umbilical cord to the fetus. Radioactive materials can also concentrate in areas of your body near the womb and expose the fetus to radiation.

Health effects to the fetus from radiation exposure can be severe, even at radiation doses too low to make you sick. These health effects can include:

    Miscarriage
    Stunted growth
    Deformities
    Abnormal brain function
    Cancer

A fetus is most sensitive to radiation between weeks 2 and 18 of pregnancy. A fetus will become less sensitive to radiation during later stages of pregnancy.

In the rare event of a radiation emergency, radiation experts can answer questions from you and your healthcare providers about radiation exposure and pregnancy.
What to do

Pregnant women should follow the same protective action instructions as everyone else. If pregnant women are advised to visit a community reception center (CRC) they should let CRC staff know about their pregnancy so that they can receive additional attention.

Contact your doctor for additional information. Your doctor can help you understand more about the risks of radiation exposure to you and to your developing baby.
More information

Frequently Asked Questions about Radiation Emergencies

Infographic: Radiation Emergencies and Pregnancy

Infographic: Radiation Contamination Versus Exposure

Radiation Emergencies and Children

















OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox®)
December 1, 2023
page 1 of 2
OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox®)
This sheet is about exposure to onabotulinumtoxinA in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based
on available published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare
provider.
What is onabotulinumtoxinA?
OnabotulinumtoxinA (formerly called botulinum toxin type A) has been used to treat migraine headaches, excessive
sweating, muscle spasms or stiffness, eye muscle conditions (such as crossed eyes, eyelid twitching), and urinary
leakage. It is also used cosmetically to reduce the look of wrinkles. It is injected into the skin or muscle. Some brand
names include Botox® or Botox Cosmetic® and Oculinum®.
There are also other forms of botulinum toxin that are used for cosmetic and medical reasons. Some brands names are
Dysport®, Xeomin®. These products have not been studied for use in pregnancy. It is not known how the information
about using these products might be the same or different from the information about using onabotulinumtoxinA.
Sometimes when women find out they are pregnant, they think about changing how they take their medication, or
stopping their medication altogether. However, it is important to talk with your healthcare providers before making
any changes to how you take this medication. Your healthcare providers can talk with you about the benefits of
treating your condition and the risks of untreated illness during pregnancy.
Is onabotulinumtoxinA related to botulism?
OnabotulinumtoxinA is a germ-free medical treatment made from the purified toxin of a bacterium called Clostridium
botulinum (C. botulinum). C. botulinum can cause a rare illness called botulism. People get botulism most
commonly by eating food contaminated with C. botulinum. Botulism bacteria are most common in foods that are not
properly preserved, like home canned foods, fermented foods (i.e., sauerkraut and pickled foods), or dented canned
foods. The bacteria are killed by heating foods for longer than 5 minutes at greater than 185°F (85°C). People with
botulism can have weakness, vision problems, trouble swallowing, dry mouth, breathing problems, and trouble
speaking. In some cases, it can be fatal. Botulism is not contagious.
I get onabotulinumtoxinA treatments, but I would like to stop before getting pregnant. How
long does the drug stay in my body?
People eliminate medication at different rates. It has been suggested that onabotulinumtoxinA stays in a person’s
system for about 4-6 months. Your healthcare provider can talk with you about when stopping your treatments may be
recommended.
I get onabotulinumtoxinA treatments. Can they make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if onabotulinumtoxinA can make it harder to get pregnant. Because it does not appear to get into the
bloodstream, it is not expected to affect the ability to get pregnant.
Does using onabotulinumtoxinA increase the chance for miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. A report from the manufacturer did
not find an increased chance for miscarriage. Other studies have not been done to see if onabotulinumtoxinA increases
the chance for miscarriage. Because it does not appear to get into the bloodstream, it is not expected to increase the
chance for miscarriage.
Does using onabotulinumtoxinA increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. There are
no published studies on onabotulinumtoxinA use during pregnancy. A report from the manufacturer, which included
pregnancies exposed either during pregnancy or a few months before getting pregnant, did not find a pattern of birth
defects or an increased chance of birth defects. Because it does not appear to get into the bloodstream, it is not
expected to increase the chance for birth defects.
OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox®)
December 1, 2023
page 2 of 2
Does taking onabotulinumtoxinA in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-
related problems?
Studies have not been done to see if onabotulinumtoxinA increases the chance for pregnancy-related problems such
as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at
birth). A report from the manufacturer did not find a higher chance for preterm delivery. Because it does not appear to
get into the bloodstream, it is not expected to increase the chance for pregnancy-related problems.
Does taking onabotulinumtoxinA in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the
child?
Studies have not been done to see if onabotulinumtoxinA can cause behavior or learning issues for the child. Because
it does not appear to get into the bloodstream, it is not expected to increase the chance for effects on behavior or
learning in the child.
Breastfeeding while taking onabotulinumtoxinA:
Studies on breastfeeding while using onabotulinumtoxinA have not been done. However, because onabotulinumtoxinA
injections are not thought to get into the bloodstream, it would be unlikely to enter the breast milk. That means risks
to an infant are thought to be low. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man uses onabotulinumtoxinA, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth
defects?
Studies have not been done to see if onabotulinumtoxinA could affect fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) or
increase the chance of birth defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to
increase the risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures
at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, December 1, 2023.



Sunless Tanners
November 1, 2023
page 1 of 2
Sunless Tanners
This sheet is about exposure to sunless tanners in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
available published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What are sunless tanners?
Sunless tanners are cosmetics, like creams and lotions that are placed on the skin to darken it, making the skin look
“tan” without sun exposure. They are sometimes also referred to as self-tanners. The common active ingredient in
sunless tanners is called dihydroxyacetone (DHA). (Not to be confused with the other DHA, docosahexaenoic acid, an
omega-3 fatty acid found in some foods and dietary supplements.) Dihydroxyacetone DHA often comes from plant
sources such as sugar beets and sugar cane.
Sunless tanning products without added sunscreen do not protect skin from the harmful effects of the sun. Therefore,
sunscreen and protective clothing are recommended to shield yourself from the sun if using sunless tanners.
Sunless tanners are cosmetics. How are cosmetics checked for safety in the United States?
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not check cosmetic products for safety and effectiveness in the same
way that medication is regulated. Companies or people who manufacture or market cosmetics have the responsibility
to ensure the safety of their products, but the FDA does not require specific safety testing. There is also no
requirement to do testing for use during pregnancy or while breastfeeding. This means there is typically no medical
data to help with choosing among brands or types of cosmetics during pregnancy or breastfeeding.
However, coloring additives, like DHA, are required to be approved by the FDA. The United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved DHA as a tanning product in the United States in the 1970’s. The approval is not
specific to pregnancy or breastfeeding. DHA is approved for use on the outside of the body. It is not approved for use
near the eyes or on the lips and not approved for breathing in the fumes. This is because there is no safety data for
DHA with use near these mucus membranes or with inhaling DHA.
Are sunless tanners absorbed into my bloodstream if I am using them on my skin?
When DHA is placed on the skin, laboratory models suggest there is very poor absorption of DHA into the bloodstream
(less than 1%). Therefore, only very small amounts of DHA should be able to reach the pregnancy.
Most over-the-counter sunless tanners contain 3-5% DHA but products marketed for a darker tan and products for
professional use could have a higher concentration. The FDA approval for DHA placed on the skin is for concentrations
up to 15%.
There are no studies that estimate the absorption of other ingredients that may also be found in sunless tanners. Other
ingredients could include moisturizers, bronzers, fragrances, vitamins, and preservatives. Absorption of these
ingredients in skin products may be less when used on healthy skin, used infrequently, or used on small areas of the
body.
What about using booths, which spray sunless tanner on me?
It is possible that if you are inhaling the sunless tanning spray fumes in tanning booths, or applying the product to
mucous membranes, more of the DHA could get into your system and result in higher blood levels.
The FDA has not approved DHA use as an all-over spray. Avoid using it near body openings or mucous membranes
(such as eyes, eyelids, mouth, lips, nose or ears). This may be hard to avoid when using a “spray tanning” booth. The
FDA recommends any person using these booths ask for protective measures to cover your eyes, mouth and nose.
I use sunless tanners. Can they make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if sunless tanners can make it harder to get pregnant since this has not been studied.
Sunless Tanners
November 1, 2023
page 2 of 2
Does using sunless tanners increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Studies have not been done to see
if sunless tanners increase the chance for miscarriage.
Does using sunless tanners increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Studies
have not been done to see if sunless tanners increase the chance of birth defects.
Does using sunless tanners in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Studies have not been done to see if sunless tanners increase the chance for pregnancy-related problems such as
preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at
birth).
Does using sunless tanners in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if sunless tanners can cause behavior or learning issues for the child.
Breastfeeding while using sunless tanners:
There are no studies on the use of sunless tanners during breastfeeding. Only small amounts of DHA applied to the
skin are expected to be able to reach breastmilk. Absorption may be further decreased when the product is used on
healthy skin, used infrequently, or used on small areas of the body only. If you use these products while breastfeeding,
make sure that the product is not placed on the breast area or in any area that may come in contact with your baby’s
skin before the product has dried. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all of your breastfeeding questions.
If a man uses sunless tanners, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth
defects?
Studies have not been done to see if sunless tanners could affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) or
increase the chance of birth defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to
increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, November 1, 2023.


Topical Acne Treatments
October 1, 2023
page 1 of 3
Topical Acne Treatments
This sheet is about exposure to over-the-counter (OTC) topical acne treatments in pregnancy and while breastfeeding.
This information is based on available published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from
your healthcare provider.
What are over-the-counter (OTC) topical acne treatments?
Over-the-counter (OTC) refers to medication that can be bought without a prescription. OTC topical acne treatments
are products that are put directly on the skin to treat acne. Topical acne treatments are available in lotion, gel, cream,
or ointment form. There are many different topical acne treatments with different generic and brand names. Common
active ingredients in OTC topical acne treatments include adapalene, azelaic acid, benzoyl peroxide, glycolic acid, and
salicylic acid. Products can vary in how strong the active ingredient is and in how much of the medication is in the
product.
This fact sheet focuses on OTC acne treatments. Prescription treatments might have higher amounts of the active
ingredients than over-the-counter products. For information on prescription acne medication, MotherToBaby has some
fact sheets available, and always feel free to contact a MotherToBaby specialist.
Clindamycin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/clindamycin-pregnancy/.
Erythromycin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/erythromycin/.
Isotretinoin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/isotretinoin-accutane-pregnancy/.
Tetracycline fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/tetracycline-pregnancy/.
Topical tretinoin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/tretinoin-retin-a-pregnancy/.
Are topical medications absorbed through the skin?
In general, the skin serves as a good barrier, so only a small amount of the acne medication is likely to be absorbed
with topical exposure. However, more of the active ingredients can be absorbed into the person’s blood stream if the
skin is broken or irritated and when it is used over a large area of the skin. The more times the medication is applied
on the skin, more can be absorbed. The amount of the medication that can reach the developing baby by absorption
through the skin is usually much lower than with medications taken by mouth.
Are there OTC topical acne treatments that may
be used during pregnancy?
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) has recommendations for the treatment of acne
during pregnancy, and you can discuss them with your healthcare providers. In general, ACOG has suggested OTC
topical products containing the following ingredients for use during pregnancy, if needed: benzoyl peroxide, azelaic
acid, salicylic acid, or glycolic acid. In addition to those recommended by ACOG, there are many other ingredients
found in OTC topical acne treatments. If you have any questions about your OTC topical acne treatment, please
contact MotherToBaby.
Are there any topical acne medications that should be avoided during pregnancy?
It has generally been recommended to avoid the use of topical retinoid medications, such as tretinoin (Retin A®) and
adapalene. This is because retinoids, when taken by mouth, are known to cause birth defects.
I use an OTC topical acne treatment. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if the use of OTC topical acne treatments can make it harder to get pregnant. However, since only small
amounts are typically expected to be absorbed through the skin, use of OTC acne treatments is unlikely to affect
fertility.
Topical Acne Treatments
October 1, 2023
page 2 of 3
Does using an OTC topical acne treatments increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Based on the data available, the
use of OTC topical acne treatments is not expected to increase the chance for miscarriage since only a small amount
of the active ingredients are expected to be absorbed with topical exposure.
Does using OTC topical acne treatments increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. While not
well studied, OTC topical acne treatments have not been associated with an increased chance for birth defects. In
many cases, only a small amount of the active ingredient is likely to be absorbed with topical exposure, which means
little medication gets into the blood stream. Because only small amounts applied on the skin are absorbed into the
body, it is not likely to increase the chance for birth defects or cause problems for the baby.
Does using OTC topical acne treatments in pregnancy increase the chance of other
pregnancy-related problems?
When used as directed, OTC topical acne treatments are not expected to increase the chance for pregnancy
complications, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8
ounces [2500 grams] at birth).
Does using OTC topical acne treatments in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for
the child?
Studies have not been done to see if using OTC topical acne treatments can cause behavior or learning issues for the
child. However, because the active ingredient is not expected to reach the fetus in significant amounts when applied
topically, an increased risk for long-term problems is not expected.
Breastfeeding while using OTC topical acne treatments:
Use of OTC topical acne treatments have not been well studied in women who are breastfeeding. However, since most
topical treatments are poorly absorbed by the skin, little, if any, of the treatment is expected to pass into the breast
milk. Make sure that the product is not placed on the breast area or in any area that may come in contact with your
baby’s skin. Be sure to wash your hands well after applying the treatment. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider
about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man uses OTC topical acne treatments, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of
birth defects?
Studies have not been done to see if use of OTC topical acne treatment could affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a
woman pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that fathers
or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the
MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Topical Acne Treatments
October 1, 2023
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, October 1, 2023.











Topical Acne Treatments
October 1, 2023
page 1 of 3
Topical Acne Treatments
This sheet is about exposure to over-the-counter (OTC) topical acne treatments in pregnancy and while breastfeeding.
This information is based on available published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from
your healthcare provider.
What are over-the-counter (OTC) topical acne treatments?
Over-the-counter (OTC) refers to medication that can be bought without a prescription. OTC topical acne treatments
are products that are put directly on the skin to treat acne. Topical acne treatments are available in lotion, gel, cream,
or ointment form. There are many different topical acne treatments with different generic and brand names. Common
active ingredients in OTC topical acne treatments include adapalene, azelaic acid, benzoyl peroxide, glycolic acid, and
salicylic acid. Products can vary in how strong the active ingredient is and in how much of the medication is in the
product.
This fact sheet focuses on OTC acne treatments. Prescription treatments might have higher amounts of the active
ingredients than over-the-counter products. For information on prescription acne medication, MotherToBaby has some
fact sheets available, and always feel free to contact a MotherToBaby specialist.
Clindamycin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/clindamycin-pregnancy/.
Erythromycin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/erythromycin/.
Isotretinoin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/isotretinoin-accutane-pregnancy/.
Tetracycline fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/tetracycline-pregnancy/.
Topical tretinoin fact sheet link: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/tretinoin-retin-a-pregnancy/.
Are topical medications absorbed through the skin?
In general, the skin serves as a good barrier, so only a small amount of the acne medication is likely to be absorbed
with topical exposure. However, more of the active ingredients can be absorbed into the person’s blood stream if the
skin is broken or irritated and when it is used over a large area of the skin. The more times the medication is applied
on the skin, more can be absorbed. The amount of the medication that can reach the developing baby by absorption
through the skin is usually much lower than with medications taken by mouth.
Are there OTC topical acne treatments that may
be used during pregnancy?
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) has recommendations for the treatment of acne
during pregnancy, and you can discuss them with your healthcare providers. In general, ACOG has suggested OTC
topical products containing the following ingredients for use during pregnancy, if needed: benzoyl peroxide, azelaic
acid, salicylic acid, or glycolic acid. In addition to those recommended by ACOG, there are many other ingredients
found in OTC topical acne treatments. If you have any questions about your OTC topical acne treatment, please
contact MotherToBaby.
Are there any topical acne medications that should be avoided during pregnancy?
It has generally been recommended to avoid the use of topical retinoid medications, such as tretinoin (Retin A®) and
adapalene. This is because retinoids, when taken by mouth, are known to cause birth defects.
I use an OTC topical acne treatment. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if the use of OTC topical acne treatments can make it harder to get pregnant. However, since only small
amounts are typically expected to be absorbed through the skin, use of OTC acne treatments is unlikely to affect
fertility.
Topical Acne Treatments
October 1, 2023
page 2 of 3
Does using an OTC topical acne treatments increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Based on the data available, the
use of OTC topical acne treatments is not expected to increase the chance for miscarriage since only a small amount
of the active ingredients are expected to be absorbed with topical exposure.
Does using OTC topical acne treatments increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. While not
well studied, OTC topical acne treatments have not been associated with an increased chance for birth defects. In
many cases, only a small amount of the active ingredient is likely to be absorbed with topical exposure, which means
little medication gets into the blood stream. Because only small amounts applied on the skin are absorbed into the
body, it is not likely to increase the chance for birth defects or cause problems for the baby.
Does using OTC topical acne treatments in pregnancy increase the chance of other
pregnancy-related problems?
When used as directed, OTC topical acne treatments are not expected to increase the chance for pregnancy
complications, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8
ounces [2500 grams] at birth).
Does using OTC topical acne treatments in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for
the child?
Studies have not been done to see if using OTC topical acne treatments can cause behavior or learning issues for the
child. However, because the active ingredient is not expected to reach the fetus in significant amounts when applied
topically, an increased risk for long-term problems is not expected.
Breastfeeding while using OTC topical acne treatments:
Use of OTC topical acne treatments have not been well studied in women who are breastfeeding. However, since most
topical treatments are poorly absorbed by the skin, little, if any, of the treatment is expected to pass into the breast
milk. Make sure that the product is not placed on the breast area or in any area that may come in contact with your
baby’s skin. Be sure to wash your hands well after applying the treatment. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider
about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man uses OTC topical acne treatments, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of
birth defects?
Studies have not been done to see if use of OTC topical acne treatment could affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a
woman pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that fathers
or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the
MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Topical Acne Treatments
October 1, 2023
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, October 1, 2023.






Ketamine
February 1, 2025
page 1 of 2
Ketamine
This sheet is about exposure to ketamine in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on published
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is ketamine?
Ketamine is an anesthetic medication. Anesthetics are used with medical procedures, such as surgery, to help lower a
person’s ability to feel pain and to make them less aware of what is happening. Ketamine has been used to treat pain
and for other medical conditions, such as asthma and major depressive disorder. This sheet will focus on the use of
ketamine for medical purposes.
MotherToBaby has fact sheets on:
General anesthesia – https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/general-anesthesia-pregnancy/.
Asthma – https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/asthma-and-pregnancy/
Depression – https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/depression-pregnancy/.
I use ketamine and I just found out that I am pregnant. What should I do?
Talk with your healthcare provider as soon as possible. Stopping ketamine should be done under the supervision of a
healthcare provider. Stopping suddenly (called “cold turkey”) could cause withdrawal. It is not known what effect, if
any, withdrawal could have on a pregnancy.
I take ketamine. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if using ketamine could make it harder to get pregnant.
Does taking ketamine increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. A few studies suggest a small
increased chance of miscarriage in people who had surgery with general anesthesia in the first half of pregnancy.
However, it is unclear if this small risk is due to anesthesia, the body’s response to surgery, illness in the person who
was pregnant, or other factors.
Does taking ketamine increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like ketamine, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
It is not known if ketamine can increase the chance of birth defects. Some studies suggest exposure to ketamine in
pregnancy can impact brain development of the fetus.
Does taking ketamine in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
It is not known if ketamine can increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems, such as preterm delivery
(birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth).
When used as an anesthetic at the time of delivery, there might be changes in uterine tone as well as frequency and
strength of contractions. Changes in fetal heart rate or breathing trouble in the newborn have been reported. There
have been reports of babies born with more muscle tone (hypertonia) after ketamine was used for minor surgery
Ketamine
February 1, 2025
page 2 of 2
during pregnancy. There are also reports of births without these issues.
Does taking ketamine in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Some studies suggest that exposure to ketamine can affect fetal brain development. This might increase the chance of
learning or behavior issues in the child. However, people who are pregnant and need surgery, especially for life-
threatening conditions, should not be discouraged from the use of general anesthesia. Talk with your healthcare
providers about the risks and benefits of your treatment options.
What about misuse of ketamine?
Ketamine has also been used without a prescription or without the supervision of a healthcare provider (misused).
Slang names for ketamine use include K, K-Hole, Super K and Special K. Misuse of ketamine in pregnancy and
breastfeeding have not been well-studied and should be avoided.
Some studies suggest exposure to ketamine in pregnancy can impact brain development of the fetus, which might
impact growth and development. There is a case report of a baby born with low muscle tone (called hypotonia or
“floppy baby syndrome”) who was exposed to ketamine misuse throughout the pregnancy. The baby’s muscle tone
improved over the first month of life. If you have been misusing ketamine, talk with your healthcare provider or
contact the National Drug Helpline at http://drughelpline.org/ or 1-888-633-3239.
Breastfeeding while taking ketamine or having received ketamine during labor and
delivery:
Ketamine has not been well studied for use while breastfeeding. Small amounts of ketamine get into breastmilk. There
are four case reports of infants who did not have side effects from breastfeeding after ketamine was given during
labor. If you suspect the baby has any symptoms (such as being too sleepy, trouble eating, or poor weight gain),
contact the child’s healthcare provider. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding
questions.
If a man takes ketamine, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
A study of 40 men with normal semen samples were exposed to ketamine. Results showed lower sperm motility
(movement). This could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a partner pregnant). In general, exposures that fathers or
sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby
fact sheet Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, February 1, 2025.



Heroin
January 1, 2024
page 1 of 2
Heroin
This sheet is about exposure to heroin in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is heroin?
Heroin is an opioid. Opioids are sometimes called narcotics. Heroin can be smoked, snorted, or injected. Some street
names for heroin include smack, dope, mud, horse, skag, junk, H, black tar, and skunk, among others. In the United
States, heroin is an illegal substance and is not available by prescription.
I just found out I am pregnant. Should I stop using heroin?
If you have been using heroin, please seek help right away. It is important to stop using during pregnancy, but you
should not stop suddenly (also called “cold turkey”). Stopping an opioid suddenly could cause you to go into
withdrawal. It is not known if or how withdrawal might affect a pregnancy. It is suggested that any reduction in heroin
be done slowly, and under the direction of your healthcare provider.
I use heroin. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Studies have not been done to see if using heroin can make it harder to get pregnant.
Does using heroin increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Studies have not been done to see
if using heroin increases the chance of miscarriage.
Does using heroin increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Studies on
heroin do not suggest an increased chance of birth defects. However, heroin is often combined with other drugs,
medications, and even chemicals that could increase the chance of birth defects. This makes it hard to know the actual
exposures and risks for each woman who uses heroin.
Does using heroin in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Studies involving women who use heroin or misuse other opioids during pregnancy (take them without a prescription,
or in higher amounts or for longer than prescribed by healthcare providers) have found an increased chance for
pregnancy-related problems including poor fetal growth, stillbirth, preterm delivery (birth before week 37), low levels
of amniotic fluid (fluid that surrounds the fetus in the uterus), and increased chance for a C-section. Using heroin close
to the time of delivery can result in withdrawal symptoms in the baby (see the section of this fact sheet on neonatal
abstinence syndrome.) Sharing needles to inject opioids increases the chance of getting infections like hepatitis C
and/or HIV, which can cross the placenta and infect the fetus.
Will my baby have withdrawal (neonatal abstinence syndrome) if I keep using heroin?
Studies have reported an increased chance for neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) with some opioids, including
heroin. Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome (NAS) is the term used to describe withdrawal symptoms in newborns from
opioid medication(s) or substances that a woman takes during pregnancy. NAS symptoms can include trouble
breathing, irritability, crying, sneezing, stuffy nose, poor sleep, extreme drowsiness (very tired), yawning, poor feeding,
sweating, tremors, seizures, vomiting, and diarrhea. Most often, symptoms of NAS appear 2 days after birth and might
last more than 2 weeks. The chance that NAS will happen depends on how often, how long, and what doses of heroin
were used during pregnancy. It also depends on if other medications or substances were also taken, if baby was born
preterm, and/or size of the baby at birth.
Most babies can be treated for withdrawal while in the hospital. If you used heroin or other opioids in your pregnancy,
it is important to let your baby’s healthcare providers know so that they can check for symptoms of NAS and provide
the best care for your newborn.
Heroin
January 1, 2024
page 2 of 2
Does using heroin in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
One small study found smaller head measurements and brain volume in infants exposed to heroin during pregnancy.
Some studies on opioids as a general group including heroin have found more problems with learning and behavior in
children exposed to opioids for a long period of time during pregnancy. It is hard to tell if this is due to opioid exposure
or other factors that might increase the chances of these problems.
Heroin and breastfeeding:
Heroin breaks down into morphine inside the body. Morphine can get into breast milk. Heroin is often combined with
other medications, drugs, or chemicals that could also enter the breast milk. Use of some opioids while breastfeeding
can cause babies to be very sleepy, have trouble latching on, or can cause problems with breathing.
The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends that heroin not be used during breastfeeding due
to concerns that the medication could build up to high levels in the baby’s system and cause problems, such as trouble
breathing or not waking to feed. If you have used heroin while breastfeeding, contact the baby’s healthcare provider
immediately if your baby has any problems such as increased sleepiness (sleeping more than usual), trouble feeding,
trouble breathing, or being limp (feeling floppy when held). Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your
breastfeeding questions.
If a man uses heroin, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Heroin use might affect the sperm, which can impact a man’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). The use of
heroin by a man is not expected to increase the chance of birth defects, but injecting heroin increases the chance of
exposure to infections such as hepatitis C or HIV. These infections can be passed through the semen to a woman who
is pregnant and then to the fetus. For more general information on paternal exposures, please see the MotherToBaby
fact sheet at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, January 1, 2024.



E-cigarettes (Vaping)
April 1, 2025
page 1 of 2
E-cigarettes (Vaping)
This sheet is about exposure to e-cigarettes in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What are e-cigarettes?
Electronic cigarettes, or e-cigarettes, are battery-operated devices that heat a liquid solution into a fine spray (aerosol)
that you inhale (breathe in), like you would inhale tobacco smoke from a traditional cigarette. E-cigarettes are known
by many different names, such as “e-cigs,” “e-hookahs,” “mods,” “vape pens,” “vapes,” “tank systems,” and
“electronic nicotine delivery systems (ENDS).” Using e-cigarettes is sometimes referred to as “vaping.”
The solutions in e-cigarettes can include chemicals such as nicotine, propylene glycol, ethylene glycol, polyethylene
glycol, diacetyl, and/or glycerol, and heavy metals such as nickel, tin, and/or lead. Artificial flavorings might also be
added. E-cigarettes can have contaminants that could pose a risk to both the health of the person using the e-cigarette
and a pregnancy.
There are only a few studies that look at e-cigarette use while pregnant. The information is limited because not all e-
cigarettes are the same and many have different ingredients. While sometimes there is information about individual
ingredients, often there is no information on the effect of those ingredients in combination. That means it is not clear
what effect, if any, the ingredients can have on a pregnancy.
Is the level of nicotine in e-cigarettes the same as traditional cigarettes?
It is not clear how much nicotine is in e-cigarettes, in part because they are not well regulated. Some labels say they
have no nicotine but do, and other labels claim to have nicotine when they do not. There may be more nicotine in
some brands of e-cigarettes than in regular cigarettes. Even though e-cigarettes are advertised to help people quit
smoking, studies have not proved that they effective. Using e-cigarettes during pregnancy is not recommended.
I use e-cigarettes. Can they make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Studies have not been done to see if exposure to e-cigarettes in humans can make it harder to get pregnant. There are
animal studies that show that nicotine and some of the flavoring ingredients found in e-cigarettes can lead to changes
in the ovaries which can affect fertility (ability to get pregnant).
Does using e-cigarettes increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. One study that looked at exposure
to e-cigarettes during pregnancy showed an increased chance of miscarriage. Other studies on traditional cigarettes
that include nicotine have been found to increase the chance of miscarriage. Our fact sheet on tobacco cigarettes can
be found at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/cigarette-smoking-pregnancy/.
Does using e-cigarettes increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like e-cigarettes, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
It is not known if e-cigarettes can increase the chance of birth defects. Animal studies suggest that exposure to e-
cigarettes during pregnancy can impact fetal development. Traditional cigarettes that have nicotine might increase the
chance for cleft lip and/or palate (opening in the lip and/or roof of the mouth), and problems with the respiratory and
digestive systems.
Does the use of e-cigarettes in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Studies have shown that people who used e-cigarettes during pregnancy have an increased chance of preterm
delivery (birth before week 37), low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth), and
poor growth. Another study suggests that using e-cigarettes before pregnancy can increase the risk for gestational
E-cigarettes (Vaping)
April 1, 2025
page 2 of 2
hypertension (high blood pressure during pregnancy).
Does using e-cigarettes in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
It is not known if the use of e-cigarettes can increase the chance of learning or behavior issues for the child. Some
studies have linked traditional cigarettes with nicotine to higher chances for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD) and learning disabilities.
What resources or treatments are available to help me to quit e-cigarettes and tobacco
cigarettes during pregnancy?
Talk with your healthcare provider about quitting. There is also free advice, support, and referrals with the Smoker’s
Quitline at 1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669). While these resources focus on tobacco cigarettes, nicotine is the
addictive chemical in both e-cigarettes and tobacco cigarettes, so they can still provide help regarding e-cigarettes.
Breastfeeding while using e-cigarettes:
The use of e-cigarettes during breastfeeding has not been studied and is not recommended while breastfeeding.
Nicotine passes into breast milk. Studies have shown that infant heart rate and blood pressure changes have been
associated with higher nicotine concentrations in milk. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your
breastfeeding questions.
If a man uses e-cigarettes, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
The use of e-cigarettes can lower the number of sperm, which can affect men’s fertility (ability to get a partner
pregnant). It is not known if e-cigarette use could increase the chance of birth defects in a partner’s pregnancy. For
more general information about paternal exposures, please see our fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2025.



Cocaine
January 1, 2025
page 1 of 2
Cocaine
This sheet is about exposure to cocaine in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on published
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is cocaine?
Cocaine is a powerful stimulant of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). Cocaine has been used
medically as a local anesthetic (for pain). Cocaine has also been used without a prescription (misused) to get a “high”
feeling. Cocaine can be inhaled through the nose, rubbed onto the gums, injected, or smoked. Some nicknames for
cocaine are blow, coke, flake, and snow. Crack is powdered cocaine that has been mixed and cooked with baking soda.
It is broken into chunks (rocks) and most often smoked.
If you have been using any form of cocaine, talk with your healthcare providers right away. It is important to stop using
cocaine. This must be done under the supervision of a healthcare provider. Stopping suddenly (also called “cold
turkey”) could cause you to go into withdrawal. It is not known if or how withdrawal might affect a pregnancy.
I use cocaine. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if using cocaine can make it harder to get pregnant.
Does using cocaine increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Using cocaine can increase the
chance of miscarriage, especially when tobacco is also used.
Does using cocaine increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like cocaine, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
It is not known if cocaine can increase the chance of birth defects. Birth defects that have been reported with cocaine
use in pregnancy include abnormalities of the brain, skull, face, eyes, heart, limbs, intestines, genitals, and urinary
tract. However, most babies exposed to cocaine during pregnancy do not have a birth defect.
Does using cocaine in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Babies exposed to cocaine during pregnancy tend to weigh less, are born shorter in length, and have smaller heads
than babies who were not exposed to cocaine during pregnancy. Cocaine can also increase the chance for preterm
delivery (birth before week 37).
Cocaine use can cause the placenta to pull away from the wall of the uterus before labor starts (placental abruption).
This can lead to heavy bleeding and can be fatal for the person who is pregnant and/or for the pregnancy.
If I use cocaine throughout my entire pregnancy, will it cause symptoms in my baby after
birth?
The use of cocaine during pregnancy can cause temporary symptoms in newborns soon after birth. These symptoms
are sometimes referred to as withdrawal. Symptoms reported in newborns with exposure to cocaine late in pregnancy
include irritability, tremors, muscle stiffness, poor feeding, trouble with sleeping, and hyperactivity at birth. Less
commonly, vomiting, diarrhea, and seizures have also been reported. Symptoms usually start 1 to 2 days after birth.
Some of these problems might last for weeks after birth, and sometimes longer. Not all babies exposed to cocaine will
have symptoms. It is important that your healthcare providers know you are taking cocaine so that if symptoms occur
your baby can get the care that is best for them.
Does using cocaine in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Cocaine exposure in pregnancy can cause significant central nervous system problems that might not be seen until the
child is older. This can include problems with attention and self-control, delays in learning, trouble processing
Cocaine
January 1, 2025
page 2 of 2
emotions, language difficulties, and increased need for special education in school.
What screenings or tests are available to see if my pregnancy has birth defects or other
issues?
Prenatal ultrasounds can be used to screen for some birth defects. Ultrasound can also be used to watch the growth of
the pregnancy. Talk with your healthcare provider about any prenatal screenings or testing that are available to you.
There are no tests available during pregnancy that can tell how much effect there could be on future behavior or
learning.
Breastfeeding while using cocaine:
Breastfeeding while using cocaine is not recommended. Cocaine in any form can pass into breast milk. Exposure to
cocaine is serious and can cause toxicity in the nursing child. Symptoms can include irritability, choking, high blood
pressure, vomiting, trouble breathing, and seizures. Never put cocaine on your nipples to treat soreness. This is
extremely dangerous for the baby and is known to cause seizures. If you suspect the baby has any symptoms
(irritability, choking, high blood pressure, vomiting, trouble breathing, or seizures), contact the child’s healthcare
provider. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man uses cocaine, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
It has been suggested to avoid cocaine and other substance use before conception. Using cocaine might affect sperm
shape and movement, which could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a partner pregnant). No birth defects have been
reported as a direct result of a man’s exposure to cocaine. For more general information on paternal exposures, please
see the MotherToBaby paternal exposures fact sheet at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, January 1, 2025.







Cigarette Smoke
June 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Cigarette Smoke
This sheet is about exposure to cigarette smoke in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is in cigarette smoke?
Cigarette smoke is made of gases and tiny particles that are released when cigarettes are burned. It has over 4,000
chemicals including nicotine, arsenic, lead, and carbon monoxide. When you breathe cigarette smoke into your lungs,
the gases and particles get into your blood and organs. Some of these chemicals can cross the placenta and lower the
amount of oxygen and food available to the fetus. You can be exposed to cigarette smoke or some of the particles by
smoking a cigarette and through secondhand smoke. Secondhand smoke is breathing in the cigarette smoke of
another person that is smoking near you.
It is recommended not to smoke cigarettes at all during pregnancy. If you are smoking, it is best to completely stop
smoking as early in pregnancy as possible. Even a few cigarettes a day can lower the amount of oxygen and nutrients
the fetus gets. If you cannot stop smoking, lowering the number of cigarettes a day that you smoke could help.
Quitting is more successful with professional and family/friend support. For free advice and referrals, call the Smoker’s
Quitline at 1- 800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) from anywhere in the U.S. There are also online resources to help you
quit smoking such as https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/quit-smoking/index.html. You can also go over your
options for quitting with your healthcare provider.
Can cigarette smoke make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Some studies have found that exposure to cigarette smoke can make it harder to get pregnant compared to people
who are not exposed to cigarette smoke. Women who smoke more than 10 cigarettes a day might have a higher
chance of problems with getting pregnant (infertility). A woman’s ability to get pregnant might improve once they stop
smoking. Cigarette smoke can also increase the chance of an ectopic pregnancy (when a fertilized egg implants and
grows outside the uterus).
Does cigarette smoke increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. The chance of miscarriage is
higher for people who are exposed to cigarette smoke.
Does cigarette smoke increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like cigarette smoke,
might increase the chance of birth defects.
Some studies suggest that exposure to cigarette smoke during pregnancy might increase the chance of certain birth
defects, including cleft lip and/or palate (an opening in the upper lip or the roof of the mouth), heart defects, and
problems with the respiratory system and digestive system.
Does cigarette smoke increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Cigarette smoke is linked with a higher chance of preterm delivery (birth before week 37) and low birth weight
(weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). The more exposure to cigarette smoke that a person
has during pregnancy, the greater the chance for preterm delivery. A baby born preterm has a higher chance for
health problems and might need to stay in the hospital longer. Low birth weight can also make it harder for the baby to
recover from serious health problems.
Cigarette smoke is linked to serious problems with the placenta (the organ that grows in the uterus during pregnancy).
The placenta delivers nutrients and oxygen to the fetus. Placental problems can include placenta previa (placenta
blocks the birth canal) and placental abruption (placenta breaks away from the uterine wall early). These conditions
can cause vaginal bleeding and can be life threatening to the person who is pregnant and/or result in loss of the
pregnancy. Cigarette smoke has also been associated with an increased chance of stillbirth and sudden infant death
Cigarette Smoke
June 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
syndrome (SIDS).
If I smoke cigarettes near the end of my pregnancy, will it cause withdrawal symptoms in
my baby after birth?
Smoking cigarettes near the end of pregnancy can cause temporary symptoms in newborns soon after birth. These
symptoms are sometimes referred to as withdrawal. Symptoms such as irritability, increased muscle tone (stiff
muscles) and muscle tremors have been seen in newborns exposed to cigarette smoking during the last weeks of
pregnancy. These symptoms are usually short-term and can be treated, if needed. Not all babies exposed to cigarette
smoke will have these symptoms. It is important that your healthcare providers know your history of exposure to
cigarette smoke so that if symptoms occur your baby can get the care that is best for them.
Can exposure to cigarette smoke during pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for
the child?
Several studies have found a link between cigarette smoke exposure in pregnancy and learning and behavior problems
in the exposed children.
I am 28 weeks pregnant, and I have been smoking cigarettes throughout my pregnancy. Is
it too late to quit?
It is never too late to quit smoking. If you stop smoking, you stop the exposure to your pregnancy. Stopping at any
time during pregnancy can help to improve the growth and development of your pregnancy. Stopping will also help
your newborn by not exposing them to secondhand smoke after they are born. Secondhand smoke can affect the
health of children after they are born if people smoke around them or in the home.
Breastfeeding and cigarette smoke:
It is recommended not to smoke cigarettes while breastfeeding and to avoid exposure to secondhand smoke. Nicotine
and other chemicals can pass into breast milk. However, the benefits of breastfeeding might outweigh the risks of
cigarette smoking. If you cannot stop smoking completely, lower the amount you smoke as much as possible, and do
not smoke in the house or when you are near the baby. Ask others not to smoke around you or in your home.
For free advice and referrals for quitting, call the Smoker’s Quitline at 1- 800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) or visit
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/quit-smoking/index.html. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about
all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man smokes cigarettes, could it affect his fertility or increase the chance of birth
defects?
Exposure to cigarette smoke might affect a man’s ability to have sex (erectile function). It can also change the amount
of sperm made (sperm counts), as well as the shape and movement of sperm. This might affect a man’s fertility
(ability to get a partner pregnant). Studies have not been done in men to see if cigarette smoke could increase the
chance of birth defects. It is recommended to stop smoking or not smoke around a person who is pregnant (including
in their house or car) because exposure to secondhand smoke can increase the chance of pregnancy complications.
For more information on paternal exposures, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/
Please click here for references.
Cigarette Smoke
June 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, June 1, 2025.





Cigarette Smoke
June 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Cigarette Smoke
This sheet is about exposure to cigarette smoke in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is in cigarette smoke?
Cigarette smoke is made of gases and tiny particles that are released when cigarettes are burned. It has over 4,000
chemicals including nicotine, arsenic, lead, and carbon monoxide. When you breathe cigarette smoke into your lungs,
the gases and particles get into your blood and organs. Some of these chemicals can cross the placenta and lower the
amount of oxygen and food available to the fetus. You can be exposed to cigarette smoke or some of the particles by
smoking a cigarette and through secondhand smoke. Secondhand smoke is breathing in the cigarette smoke of
another person that is smoking near you.
It is recommended not to smoke cigarettes at all during pregnancy. If you are smoking, it is best to completely stop
smoking as early in pregnancy as possible. Even a few cigarettes a day can lower the amount of oxygen and nutrients
the fetus gets. If you cannot stop smoking, lowering the number of cigarettes a day that you smoke could help.
Quitting is more successful with professional and family/friend support. For free advice and referrals, call the Smoker’s
Quitline at 1- 800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) from anywhere in the U.S. There are also online resources to help you
quit smoking such as https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/quit-smoking/index.html. You can also go over your
options for quitting with your healthcare provider.
Can cigarette smoke make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Some studies have found that exposure to cigarette smoke can make it harder to get pregnant compared to people
who are not exposed to cigarette smoke. Women who smoke more than 10 cigarettes a day might have a higher
chance of problems with getting pregnant (infertility). A woman’s ability to get pregnant might improve once they stop
smoking. Cigarette smoke can also increase the chance of an ectopic pregnancy (when a fertilized egg implants and
grows outside the uterus).
Does cigarette smoke increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. The chance of miscarriage is
higher for people who are exposed to cigarette smoke.
Does cigarette smoke increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like cigarette smoke,
might increase the chance of birth defects.
Some studies suggest that exposure to cigarette smoke during pregnancy might increase the chance of certain birth
defects, including cleft lip and/or palate (an opening in the upper lip or the roof of the mouth), heart defects, and
problems with the respiratory system and digestive system.
Does cigarette smoke increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Cigarette smoke is linked with a higher chance of preterm delivery (birth before week 37) and low birth weight
(weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). The more exposure to cigarette smoke that a person
has during pregnancy, the greater the chance for preterm delivery. A baby born preterm has a higher chance for
health problems and might need to stay in the hospital longer. Low birth weight can also make it harder for the baby to
recover from serious health problems.
Cigarette smoke is linked to serious problems with the placenta (the organ that grows in the uterus during pregnancy).
The placenta delivers nutrients and oxygen to the fetus. Placental problems can include placenta previa (placenta
blocks the birth canal) and placental abruption (placenta breaks away from the uterine wall early). These conditions
can cause vaginal bleeding and can be life threatening to the person who is pregnant and/or result in loss of the
pregnancy. Cigarette smoke has also been associated with an increased chance of stillbirth and sudden infant death
Cigarette Smoke
June 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
syndrome (SIDS).
If I smoke cigarettes near the end of my pregnancy, will it cause withdrawal symptoms in
my baby after birth?
Smoking cigarettes near the end of pregnancy can cause temporary symptoms in newborns soon after birth. These
symptoms are sometimes referred to as withdrawal. Symptoms such as irritability, increased muscle tone (stiff
muscles) and muscle tremors have been seen in newborns exposed to cigarette smoking during the last weeks of
pregnancy. These symptoms are usually short-term and can be treated, if needed. Not all babies exposed to cigarette
smoke will have these symptoms. It is important that your healthcare providers know your history of exposure to
cigarette smoke so that if symptoms occur your baby can get the care that is best for them.
Can exposure to cigarette smoke during pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for
the child?
Several studies have found a link between cigarette smoke exposure in pregnancy and learning and behavior problems
in the exposed children.
I am 28 weeks pregnant, and I have been smoking cigarettes throughout my pregnancy. Is
it too late to quit?
It is never too late to quit smoking. If you stop smoking, you stop the exposure to your pregnancy. Stopping at any
time during pregnancy can help to improve the growth and development of your pregnancy. Stopping will also help
your newborn by not exposing them to secondhand smoke after they are born. Secondhand smoke can affect the
health of children after they are born if people smoke around them or in the home.
Breastfeeding and cigarette smoke:
It is recommended not to smoke cigarettes while breastfeeding and to avoid exposure to secondhand smoke. Nicotine
and other chemicals can pass into breast milk. However, the benefits of breastfeeding might outweigh the risks of
cigarette smoking. If you cannot stop smoking completely, lower the amount you smoke as much as possible, and do
not smoke in the house or when you are near the baby. Ask others not to smoke around you or in your home.
For free advice and referrals for quitting, call the Smoker’s Quitline at 1- 800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) or visit
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/campaign/tips/quit-smoking/index.html. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about
all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man smokes cigarettes, could it affect his fertility or increase the chance of birth
defects?
Exposure to cigarette smoke might affect a man’s ability to have sex (erectile function). It can also change the amount
of sperm made (sperm counts), as well as the shape and movement of sperm. This might affect a man’s fertility
(ability to get a partner pregnant). Studies have not been done in men to see if cigarette smoke could increase the
chance of birth defects. It is recommended to stop smoking or not smoke around a person who is pregnant (including
in their house or car) because exposure to secondhand smoke can increase the chance of pregnancy complications.
For more information on paternal exposures, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/
Please click here for references.
Cigarette Smoke
June 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, June 1, 2025.
Carbon Monoxide
May 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Carbon Monoxide
This sheet is about exposure to carbon monoxide in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is carbon monoxide?
Carbon monoxide is a gas. It has no color, smell, or taste. Small amounts of carbon monoxide are typically found in our
bodies and in the air we breathe. Larger amounts of carbon monoxide can be released from poorly working fuel
burning appliances like furnaces, water heaters, and gas stoves. Exhaust from cars and other vehicles release carbon
monoxide.
How can carbon monoxide get into my body?
Carbon monoxide can enter the body by breathing it in (inhalation). Breathing in any type of smoke can lead to more
carbon monoxide in your body.
What is carbon monoxide poisoning?
Carbon monoxide poisoning happens when too much carbon monoxide gets into the body. When there is too much
carbon monoxide in the body, the blood carries less oxygen to the organs. Symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning
can include headache, nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness, upset stomach, and dizziness. More severe symptoms are
confusion, stumbling or falling, chest pain, sleepiness, and passing out (loss of consciousness). Severe carbon
monoxide poisoning can cause death.
How can I lower the chance of carbon monoxide exposure or poisoning?
Make sure home appliances that burn fuels are properly installed, vented, and maintained
Have working carbon monoxide and smoke detectors in your home that are battery operated or backed up by
batteries in case there is a power outage
Use generators outside only, away from the home/windows/doors
Avoid heating your home with an oven
Avoid leaving a car running in an attached garage
Avoid cigarette smoke (For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet on cigarette smoking
at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/cigarette-smoking-pregnancy/.)
What should I do if I am pregnant and think I have carbon monoxide poisoning?
Carbon monoxide poisoning is a medical emergency. If you have any symptoms that you think are from carbon
monoxide, you should be taken to the emergency room right away. In pregnancy, the carbon monoxide might not get
into the fetus’ blood right away. However, once it does, it takes much longer for the fetus to clear the carbon monoxide
than it would an adult. If you do have carbon monoxide poisoning, you might be given treatment to help you and the
fetus get rid of the carbon monoxide. The source of carbon monoxide should be found, and the problem should be
fixed as soon as possible to stop further exposure.
Carbon Monoxide
May 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
Can exposure to carbon monoxide make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Studies have not been done to see if carbon monoxide exposure can make it harder to get pregnant.
Does exposure to carbon monoxide increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Carbon monoxide might be linked
to a higher chance of miscarriage. Effects can depend on when (timing) in pregnancy someone is exposed and how
much (dose) carbon monoxide they are exposed to.
Does exposure to carbon monoxide increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like carbon monoxide,
might increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
There are reports of babies being born with birth defects after exposure to carbon monoxide during pregnancy.
However, most pregnancies with carbon monoxide exposure do not have birth defects, and no pattern of birth defects
has been linked to carbon monoxide poisoning. The main concerns with carbon monoxide poisoning during pregnancy
are the chance of pregnancy loss and possible harm to fetal brain development.
Does exposure to carbon monoxide increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Some studies suggest that exposure to carbon monoxide in pregnancy can increase the chance of other pregnancy-
related problems, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37), low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8
ounces [2500 grams] at birth), and stillbirth. There are also reports of healthy outcomes after pregnancies with carbon
monoxide poisoning.
Does exposure to carbon monoxide affect future learning or behavior of the child?
Carbon monoxide exposure during pregnancy might affect fetal brain development, which could increase the chance of
learning or behavior problems later in life. There are reports of healthy outcomes in pregnancies after carbon
monoxide poisoning. Effects can depend on when (timing) in pregnancy someone is exposed and how much (dose)
carbon monoxide they are exposed to.
Breastfeeding and exposure to carbon monoxide:
There are no human studies looking at carbon monoxide exposure during breastfeeding. Absorption of carbon
monoxide from swallowing breastmilk is thought to be unlikely. If you get carbon monoxide poisoning, talk to your
healthcare provider about breastfeeding. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all of your breastfeeding
questions.
If a man is exposed to carbon monoxide, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of
birth defects?
Studies have not been done in humans to see if carbon monoxide could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a partner
pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects. Animal studies show carbon monoxide exposure can reduce how
many sperm are formed, which could affect fertility. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to increase risks
to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here to view references.
Carbon Monoxide
May 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, May 1, 2025.


Paint
November 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Paint
This sheet is about exposure to paint in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is paint?
In general, paint is made up of pigment particles (color) in a liquid base called the medium. There are two broad
categories of paint: oil paints (oil/alkyd-based medium) and latex paints (water-based medium). Oil paints are thinned
or cleaned with paint thinners including turpentine or mineral spirits. Latex paints are thinned or cleaned with soap
and water. Most household paints are latex, vinyl, or acrylic compounds. Oil paints are sometimes used for trim work
(such as around doors) in homes. There are many other mixtures of paints used for industry, the arts, and hobbies. In
the past, lead and mercury were used in paint.
How could I be exposed to the chemicals in paint and what symptoms could they cause?
Exposure to paint can happen by breathing in dust or fumes (inhalation), direct skin contact (absorption) or swallowing
paint chips or dust (ingestion). Painting in an area with poor or no ventilation (movement of fresh air around a closed
space) for long periods of time could cause symptoms such as nausea, headaches, or loss of appetite. Some people
might have allergic skin reactions or eye irritation. Ingestion of paint can lead to stomach irritation, nausea, or
vomiting. Ingesting lead-based paint is toxic. Like other exposures, the amount (level) and duration (time) are
important when thinking about an increased chance for problems. However, the exact level of paint exposure is
usually not known. In general, ongoing exposure through a work setting would likely give higher total exposure than
one-time household exposure. Smell is not a good measure of the level of exposure.
Does using paint increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Household painting with proper
safety precautions is expected to result in a low level of exposure and is not likely to increase the chance of
miscarriage.
Does using paint increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like paint, might increase
the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy. It is not known if paint exposure can increase the chance of birth defects.
Household painting with proper safety precautions is expected to result in a low level of exposure and is not likely to
increase the chance of birth defects.
Does using paint increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
It is not known if paint can increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems, such as preterm delivery (birth
before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth).
Misusing paint (huffing):
Inhaling fumes from household substances to experience a “high” is called huffing. Some people huff paint or thinner
containing toluene (a clear liquid with a unique smell that is used in making paints, paint thinners, and other products).
There are older reports of babies born with problems after prenatal exposure to toluene-containing paint. In these
cases, pregnant women were pregnant were directly huffing paint. Some of these babies were born preterm and had
low birth weight, a small head size (microcephaly), and facial features similar to children exposed to alcohol during
pregnancy. These children also had developmental delays. In these cases, the pregnant women were exposed to very
high amounts of toluene and a much higher exposure than a hobby, painting a room in the home, or a professional
painter would likely have.
How can I protect myself when painting?
Consider having someone else do the painting for you. If you plan to paint, reduce your exposure by:
Paint
November 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
Selecting the correct paint, such as using paint for indoors only when painting a room in your house.
Reading the product label and following all handling instructions for painting, cleaning, and storing.
Working in a well-ventilated (fresh air) area with open windows and doors. Use fans in windows to help the air
move. After painting, ventilate the room for another 2 to 3 days, and limit your time in this area.
Wearing protective clothing such as long sleeves to cover your skin as well as gloves. If painting is part of your
job, talk to your safety officer about wearing a respirator mask that filters vapors from paints and thinners.
Not eating or drinking while painting.
Washing your hands well after painting.
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has a booklet with healthy tips for indoor painting at:
https://www.cpsc.gov/s3fs-public/painting.pdf.
Walls, windows, or other surfaces might contain lead paint, especially in older homes. Be careful of exposure even if
you are not preparing the walls. The dust you inhale might contain lead. MotherToBaby has a fact sheet on lead here:
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/lead-pregnancy/.
I work as a painter. Can my work increase the chance of birth defects or other pregnancy-
related problems?
Studies looking at professional painters have mixed results. These studies usually combine the outcomes of
pregnancies of painters, printers, chemists, factory workers, and laboratory technicians, all with different chemical
exposures. No consistent pattern of birth defects or increased chance of pregnancy complications has been reported.
Among professional painters, exposure levels will vary greatly based on paints and cleaners used, ventilation, wall
preparation, protective gear used, handling and storage, and amount of time working. While there is no clear concern
for painters, lowering chemical and fume exposure makes sense for both adult and pregnancy health. Each product
has specific safety precautions on the label. An occupational health specialist or industrial hygienist might be able to
offer specific ways to reduce your chemical exposure at work. More information and safety tips for working around
chemicals can be found at: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/reproductive-hazards-workplace/.
I live in an old home, and I am concerned about lead paint.
The U.S. Federal Government banned lead-based paint from housing in 1978. However, lead-based paint might still be
present in older homes. Paint chips can be tested for lead. Women who are pregnant should not remove old paint. Do
not scrape, sand, or burn old paint because this puts higher concentrations of heavy metals (like lead), solvents, and
other chemicals into the air.
If you need to remove lead paint from your home, have it done by someone who is certified in lead removal. Stay away
from the area until the project is done, and the area is properly cleaned. For more information on lead, please see the
MotherToBaby fact sheet at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/lead-pregnancy/.
Breastfeeding:
Exposure to paint during breastfeeding has not been well-studied. However, it is unlikely that low-level paint exposure
in the breastfeeding woman would cause side effects in a nursing child. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider
about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man is exposed to paint, can it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
It is not known if paint could affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) or increase the chance of birth
defects. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information,
please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Paint
November 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, November 1, 2024.


Pesticides
July 1, 2023
page 1 of 2
Pesticides
This sheet is about exposure to pesticides in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What are pesticides?
Pesticide are substances used to prevent or destroy “pests” such as weeds, insects, animals (rodents and other),
fungus and parasites that can harm crops or people. For example, pesticides are used to lower the number of
mosquitoes which may carry the Zika virus or parasites that cause diseases (like malaria) that can be spread to
people. Pesticides used to kill weeds are called herbicides. Pesticides used to kill or prevent the growth of fungi and
their spores are called fungicides.
Pesticides sprayed outside with ground equipment or by aircraft are called outdoor pesticides. There are many
household products that are also considered pesticides, such as cockroach spray, rat poison, or flea collars for pets.
These products are known as indoor pesticides.
This sheet talks in general about pesticides. Please contact MotherToBaby to see if there is more information on a
specific product or ingredient that you have questions about. When calling, have a copy of the label nearby so that you
can list the ingredients.
How can pesticides get into my body?
Pesticides can get into the body in several ways, such as breathing them in (inhalation), eating foods that were
sprayed with pesticides (ingestion), or absorbing them through your skin. When outdoor pesticides are being sprayed,
wind can carry some of the pesticide to other areas. Small amounts of outdoor pesticides can also be found in the food
and water supply.
What are some commonly used pesticides?
There are many different kinds of pesticides used in the United States. Some commonly used pesticides are glyphosate
(Round Up®), organochlorines pesticides (DDT, dieldrin, lindane), organophosphate pesticides (examples are
malathion and naled) and pyrethrin and pyrethroid pesticides (example: Anvil®, Raid®).
Will exposure to pesticides harm my pregnancy?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Most animal
studies with glyphosate, organophosphates, organochlorines, pyrethrins, or pyrethroid exposure have not shown an
increased chance for birth defects above the background risk. Low birth weight and higher rates of fetal loss were seen
at doses that were poisonous to the pregnant animal.
Two human studies looked at pregnancy outcomes following the repeated spraying of malathion, and another study
looked at several different pesticides. These studies did not find a consistent increase in birth defects above the
background risk. Also, there were no reported effects on birth weight or the rates of gestational diabetes or
miscarriage. Another study found a higher chance for preterm delivery (birth before week 37) in counties of California
that used higher levels of pesticides when compared to counties with lower pesticide use. These studies are limited
because although pesticides were used in the community, the amount of exposure to each woman is typically not
known. A study of 113 women using a pyrethroid cream to treat head lice during pregnancy did not show an increased
chance for birth defects or pregnancy complications.
How can I minimize my exposure to pesticides?
For all pesticides, it is important to carefully follow the recommendations for use. If possible, avoid mixing and applying
pesticides yourself. If that is not possible, exposure can be minimized by working in a well-ventilated area and using
protective equipment such as a respirator, long sleeves, long pants, and gloves. Always follow handling and storage
instructions on the pesticide label. It is unlikely that having your home or workplace treated by a professional
exterminator will result in a high enough exposure to increase risks to a pregnancy. To reduce exposure to pesticides
found on food, wash produce and your hands well before eating.
Pesticides
July 1, 2023
page 2 of 2
Breastfeeding and pesticides:
Studies have not been done to look at the effects of pesticides while breastfeeding. The benefits of breastfeeding may
outweigh the risk of exposure from pesticides sprayed in your home, workplace, or community. Be sure to talk to your
healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man is exposed to pesticides at home or at work, could it affect fertility (ability to get a
woman pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects?
There are adult safety levels for pesticide exposure that should be followed in the workplace. In animal studies, high
doses of malathion reduced a man’s fertility. A study of 152 farmers found the 62 men who had been exposed to
either paraquat or malathion or both in various amounts had lower sperm count and motility than those not exposed.
Another human study compared men with high and low sperm counts and did not find a difference in the amounts of a
malathion breakdown product in their bodies. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to increase the risks to
a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, July 1, 2023.





Pregnancy and Natural Disasters
May 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Pregnancy and Natural Disasters
This sheet is about exposure to natural disasters in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is a natural disaster?
Natural disasters are events that result from natural processes of the Earth. They can greatly affect a person’s health
and safety. Some examples of natural disasters include heat waves, hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, and wildfires.
How can I prepare for a natural disaster?
Preparation is key for people who are pregnant because they are considered a vulnerable population during these
times. The CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and the U.S. government have helpful information to get
you through a disaster:
Natural Disaster Safety for Expecting and New Parents:
https://www.samhsa.gov/resource/dbhis/disaster-safety-expecting-new-parents
Safety Messages for Pregnant, Postpartum, and Breastfeeding People During Natural Disasters and Severe
Weather:
https://www.cdc.gov/reproductive-health/emergency-preparation-response/safety-messages.html?CDC_AAref_V
al=https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/emergency/safety-messages.htm
Information to prepare for natural disasters such as floods, hurricanes, earthquakes: https://www.ready.gov/
I am pregnant. What are some exposures that could happen during or after a natural
disaster?
Vaccinations
Vaccinations are given to protect people from serious diseases. Some vaccinations that might be recommended
following a natural disaster are hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and/or tetanus. If you are up to date on these vaccinations, you
may not need to get them again. Keep your vaccination record in a safe place and take it with you when you see your
healthcare provider, especially if you need to move to a new area. Your healthcare providers or health authorities may
recommend additional vaccinations. MotherToBaby has a fact sheet on vaccines at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/vaccines-pregnancy/.
Infections
There can be risks for infections after a natural disaster. Drinking polluted food or water, physical injury, and/or
crowding in shelters can increase the chance of infection. Follow the recommendations from health authorities to lower
your chances of getting an infection. If you think you already have an infection, talk to your healthcare provider right
away. Be sure to follow their advice on treating your infection.
Medication
If you take medication, keep it in a safe place and continue to take it as directed. If you have a condition that needs
monitoring and you cannot reach your healthcare provider, let authorities know as soon as it is safe to do so. You may
need to take other medication if you have an infection or other illness. Contact MotherToBaby
(https://mothertobaby.org/contact-expert/ or 866.626.6847) if you have questions about specific medication(s).
Mosquito-Borne Illness
During or after a natural disaster, there may be more mosquitoes around. Using insect repellent correctly is important
to help protect against infections spread by mosquitoes, such as
Zika: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/zika-virus-pregnancy/
Pregnancy and Natural Disasters
May 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
West Nile Virus: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/west-nile-virus-infection-pregnancy/
Malaria: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/malaria/
Dengue: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/dengue/
Insect Repellent
Insect repellent is recommended for people who are pregnant or breastfeeding. Use as directed on the label. The most
common active ingredient in insect repellent is DEET. Please see our fact sheets for more information:
DEET: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/deet-nn-ethyl-m-toluamide-pregnancy/
General insect repellents: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/insect-repellents/.
Other ways to lower your chance of being bitten by a mosquito include wearing long pants, long sleeved shirts, a hat,
and shoes.
Cleaning Products
When used as directed on the label, common household cleaning products are not expected to increase the risks to
your pregnancy. To help reduce skin exposure, wear the type of gloves recommended on the product label. Wash your
hands well after using cleaning products.
Chemicals/Pollutants
If you think that you may have been exposed to harmful chemicals or pollutants and you have symptoms or concerns,
contact your healthcare provider and Poison Control as soon as possible. Poison Control can be reached online at
https://www.poison.org/ or by calling 1-800-222-1222.
Lead
If you have been exposed to lead, talk to your healthcare provider. MotherToBaby has a fact sheet on lead at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/lead-pregnancy/
Water
The water supply may not be safe to use after a natural disaster. Local authorities will tell you if your water supply is
safe to drink, to use for cooking, or to use for bathing. It may be recommended to drink bottled water. If bottled water
is not available, use boiled water if the local public health department says this is okay. Bringing water to a rolling boil
for 1 minute will kill most disease-causing organisms, but it will not remove chemicals. Do not use water that has been
treated with iodine unless you do not have bottled water and cannot boil your water. If you do not have clean water for
washing hands, use alcohol-based hand sanitizers.
Stress
Stress is the way your body reacts to something that is unusual, dangerous, unknown, or disturbing. Feeling stress is
very common during natural disasters. When under stress, your body goes through physical and chemical changes.
Some of the symptoms of stress can include chest pain, fast heart rate, breathing problems, headaches, vision
problems, confusion, anxiety, grief, denial, fear, or worry. Please see our fact sheet on stress at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/stress-pregnancy/. Also, the Disaster Distress Helpline, (phone: 1-800-985-5990),
is a 24/7, 365-day-a-year, national hotline dedicated to providing immediate crisis counseling for people who are
experiencing emotional distress related to any natural or human-caused disaster.
Mold
Molds are fungi that can be found both indoors and outdoors. They grow best in warm, damp, and humid places. Some
molds can produce substances called toxins. In some people, exposure to mold toxins can cause symptoms such as
stuffy nose, eye irritation, rashes, wheezing, fever, or shortness of breath. For more information on mold see our fact
sheet at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/mold-pregnancy/.
Pregnancy and Natural Disasters
May 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Breastfeeding after a natural disaster:
If possible, keep breastfeeding even after a natural disaster. Breast milk can help protect babies from infections. For
more information, see our sheet Breastfeeding Following a Natural Disaster at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/breastfeeding-natural-disaster/. If you have a question about a specific
medication, infection, or other exposure while breastfeeding, contact a MotherToBaby specialist. Be sure to talk to
your healthcare provider about all of your breastfeeding questions.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, May 1, 2025.








Breastfeeding Following a Natural Disaster
April 1, 2024
page 1 of 2
Breastfeeding Following a Natural Disaster
This sheet is about the possible exposures during breastfeeding after a natural disaster. This information is based on
available published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What could I be exposed to in a natural disaster?
While many substances enter breast milk, most are not likely to harm a breastfed baby. In most cases, the benefits of
breastfeeding far outweigh any risk from an exposure. However, if you notice anything unusual in your nursing baby,
tell your healthcare providers right away. This is especially important after a natural disaster, when you or your baby
could be exposed to things you wouldn’t usually be around.
Vaccinations
Vaccinations are given to protect people from serious diseases. Vaccinations are important for both the woman who is
breastfeeding and the nursing baby for their individual health. Vaccines can be “live” or “inactivated”. Inactivated
vaccines do not contain a live virus. This means they are noninfectious and cannot give a person the disease that it is
given to prevent.
Vaccinations that you might be given following a natural disaster include hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and/or tetanus. In
most cases, these vaccinations are compatible with breastfeeding. Other vaccinations might be needed after some
disasters. Check with your healthcare provider and local health officials about which vaccines are recommended if a
natural disaster has occurred in your area.
Infections
Some infections are common after a natural disaster. A local infection on the skin of a woman who is breastfeeding is
not usually dangerous to a breastfeeding baby. More serious infections such as those caused by methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Vibrio, West Nile virus, hepatitis A virus, hepatitis B virus and others can be more
complicated. If you think you have an infection, talk to a healthcare provider right away.
In general, a woman who has an infection can continue to breastfeed. Be sure to drink plenty of liquids when you have
an infection or other illness to help keep you hydrated. If you become severely dehydrated, you may become ill and it
might reduce the amount of milk you are able to make.
Medication
There are many reasons why a person may need to take medication after a natural disaster, such as having an
infection or other illness. Many medications are compatible with breastfeeding. Other medications might affect a baby
that is breastfeeding. If you need to take medication, for any reason, be sure to tell your healthcare provider that you
are breastfeeding, so you get the medication that is right for you and your baby. Watch the baby for side effects while
you are taking any medication. If your baby develops a rash, hives, has a change in weight, sleeping habits, or if you
notice anything else unusual, tell your healthcare provider right away.
Insect Repellant
Using insect repellant is an important way to help protect from infections spread by mosquitoes and ticks. A bite from
an infected mosquito could give you a serious illness such as West Nile virus or Zika virus. Lyme disease comes from
an infected tick. The most common active ingredient in insect repellant is DEET. It is not known whether the DEET you
put on your skin passes into breast milk. However, only about 6-8% of the DEET put on your skin gets into your body.
This means that very little DEET is expected to get into your breast milk. A woman who is breastfeeding should follow
the same recommendations that are given for the use of DEET in children. These include applying the insect repellant
with DEET to your clothing and then only putting it on uncovered skin such as your hands and face. Never apply insect
repellant to the breast area. Wash your hands after applying insect repellant and before handling your baby or
breastfeeding so that the baby’s mouth is not exposed to DEET.
Other ways to lower your chance of being bitten by a mosquito or tick include staying indoors with proper screens
during peak times of mosquito activity (usually overnight from dusk through dawn, although some mosquitos are
Breastfeeding Following a Natural Disaster
April 1, 2024
page 2 of 2
active at all times of day and night). It is also best to wear long pants, long-sleeved shirts, a hat, and shoes with socks
while outdoors when possible.
Cleaning Agents
Typical household use of cleaning agents is not expected to produce levels in breast milk that could hurt a baby. To
help protect yourself, wear gloves when using cleaning agents; also keep fresh air moving into your work area (open
windows/doors and/or run a ventilation fan). Wash hands well after handling cleaning supplies.
Pollutants
Exposure to low levels of environmental chemicals is usually not a reason to stop breastfeeding. The benefits of
breastfeeding generally outweigh the risks of exposure to low levels of environmental chemicals. If you think that you
may have been exposed to high amounts of a harmful chemical, contact your healthcare provider as soon as possible.
If you have been exposed to lead, a blood test can tell if the level is high. Usually, a woman does not have to stop
breastfeeding unless the level of lead in her blood is very high.
What if I need to give my baby formula?
If you give your baby formula, it is best to use single serving containers of ready-to-feed formula whenever possible.
This is especially important if the water supply is not clean or safe to drink or if the electricity is off. Ready-to-feed
formula does not need added water and it does not need to be kept in a refrigerator. Local authorities will tell you if
your water supply is safe to drink or to use for cooking or bathing.
If ready-to-feed formula is not available, use bottled water to mix powdered or concentrated formula. If bottled water is
not available, use boiled water. Bringing water to a rolling boil for 1 minute will kill most disease-causing organisms,
but it will not remove chemicals.
Do not use water that has been treated with iodine or chlorine tablets to prepare formula unless you do not have
bottled water and cannot boil your water. Be sure to clean bottles and nipples thoroughly with bottled, boiled, or
treated water before every use. Always wash your hands before preparing formula and before feeding your baby. If
you do not have clean water for washing hands, use alcohol-based hand sanitizers.
Where can I find more information on specific exposures through breast milk?
MotherToBaby has fact sheets about many exposures which include information about breastfeeding
(https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets-parent/).
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2024.












Critical Periods of Development
April 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Critical Periods of Development
This fact sheet is about the critical periods of development and the birth defects or complications that can happen
from exposures at different times in a pregnancy. This information is based on published research studies. It should
not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare providers.
What are critical periods of development?
Critical periods of development are times during pregnancy when the fetal organs and body parts are forming. During
these times, the fetus is especially sensitive to things that could cause harm, like toxins or infections.
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. Pregnancy problems (like miscarriage) can also happen in any pregnancy. Sometimes,
exposures like medications, drugs, alcohol, and infections can increase the chance of birth defects or pregnancy
complications. However, for an exposure to affect a pregnancy, it generally has to happen during the “critical period”
when a body part is forming. The dose (how much), frequency (how often), and the way the exposure enters the body
(swallowed, breathed in, put on the skin, etc.) can also play a role.
What are birth defects?
Birth defects are differences in how a body part looks or works. Birth defects can be called “major” or “minor”. Major
birth defects, like heart problems or spina bifida (when the spine does not close as it should), might need surgery or
treatment. Minor birth defects (such as wide-set eyes or large ears) do not usually need treatment.
In the chart below, the green bars refer to timing of when fetal body parts are forming. During the critical time of
development for the body parts, they can be more sensitive to exposure.
What are functional defects?
Functional defects change how a part of the body works without changing how it looks. Examples of a functional defect
are some types of intellectual disability and hearing loss. Intellectual disability can occur at any point during
pregnancy, but most functional defects usually develop after the first trimester.
The critical period for when different functional defects can occur is shown on the chart below in purple.
When can birth defects happen?
Most birth defects happen in the first trimester of pregnancy, which ends at 13 weeks and 6 days since a person’s LMP
(last menstrual period). This is because the major structures of the body (including the heart, arms, legs, lips, and
palate) form in the first trimester.
For an exposure to cause a birth defect, the body part must be developing at the time. For example, if a woman takes
a medication that can increase the chance of cleft lip (when the top lip does not close correctly), the risk is higher if
the exposure happens when the lip is forming (around 6 to 9 weeks). Once a body part has finished forming, exposures
are less likely to cause defects. So, if the medication is taken at 20 weeks, the risk of cleft lip is very low because the
lip is already formed.
As the fetus continues to grow and develop in the second and third trimesters, some exposures can cause problems
with how the body part works (functional defect). The ears, for example, are formed in the first trimester. However,
problems with how the ears work (e.g. hearing loss) can happen in the second and third trimester. Problems with fetal
growth or preterm delivery (before week 37 of pregnancy) might also happen.
The chart below gives an overview of when different body parts are thought to be most sensitive to exposures during
pregnancy. For an interactive version, where you can enter your information and receive a personalized view, please
visit: https://mothertobaby.org/critical-periods-pregnancy-development-tool/ . If you have other questions after using
the tool, please reach out to a MotherToBaby specialist for more information.
Critical Periods of Development
April 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
Download the image.
Pregnancy dating:
The chart shown above dates a pregnancy by last menstrual period (LMP). Dating by LMP is also known as gestational
age, and this is the type of dating that most healthcare providers use. Gestational age begins with the first day of a
person’s last menstrual period. This day is usually about two weeks before pregnancy is conceived.
What is the “all or none period”?
The first 2 weeks after conception (weeks 3 and 4 since first day of LMP) is known as the “all or none period”. During
this time, the sperm and the egg have met and formed an embryo which then makes its way down the fallopian tube
toward the uterus. During this time, the embryo is not implanted in the uterus, and it is not sharing a blood supply with
the person who is pregnant.
The “all” part of this theory refers to very harmful exposures during this time that might be able to stop the embryo
from attaching to the uterus or would be able to damage many of the embryo’s cells. Problems with uterine
attachment and severe cell damage can both result in miscarriage. Sometimes a miscarriage happens before a person
even realizes that they are pregnant. “None” refers to exposures that are not high enough to have a significant effect
on the pregnancy. If a few cells are damaged early on, the embryo has a greater ability to recover at this early stage
than later in pregnancy. If a woman does not have a miscarriage from this early exposure, birth defects are not
expected.
The all or none period can be used to understand the chance of many different types of exposures. However, there are
Critical Periods of Development
April 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
some important exceptions to this rule. Please contact MotherToBaby to discuss your specific exposure with our
experts.
Please click here for references.
USE OUR INTERACTIVE TOOL: CRITICAL PERIODS OF PREGNANCY
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2025.


Caffeine
September 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Caffeine
This sheet is about exposure to caffeine in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on published
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is caffeine?
Caffeine is a stimulant found in many foods and beverages. It is also found in some prescription and over the counter
medications. Caffeine is naturally found in the leaves, seeds, and fruits of more than 60 plants. Caffeine’s main effect
is making people feel more awake for a short time. Caffeine is also a diuretic, meaning that it helps get rid of fluids
from the body. It is important that women who use caffeine stay well-hydrated by drinking enough water. Most experts
suggest that women who are pregnant limit their caffeine intake to 200 mg or less per day.
How much caffeine is in common foods and drinks?
The best way to know how much caffeine is in a product is to check the ingredient label. The amount of caffeine in
some common items is listed below (amounts are approximate and might vary between products):
8 oz. cup of brewed coffee 137 mg
12 oz. (tall) Starbucks® cup of coffee 235 mg
8 oz. cup of instant coffee 76 mg
8 oz. cup of brewed tea 48 mg
8 oz. cup of hot chocolate 5 mg
12 oz. Coke® 46 mg
Red Bull® energy drink 67 mg
1 cup of coffee ice cream 4 mg
Milk chocolate bar 10 mg
Dark chocolate bar 30 mg
2 tablets of Excedrin® 130 mg
Some herbal supplements such as guarana also contain caffeine (about 47mg per 1g). Beverages made from the
guarana seed also contain caffeine.
I consume (eat/drink) products with caffeine. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Some studies have suggested that high levels of caffeine (more than 300 mg per day) might make it harder to get
pregnant, but these findings are not proven. Low (less than 200mg per day) to moderate (about 200-300 mg per day)
caffeine consumption has not been proven to make it harder to get pregnant.
Does caffeine increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Researchers have not reported an
association between low (under 200 mg) levels of caffeine and an increased chance of miscarriage. Some studies
suggest that the chance of miscarriage might be increased when people consume moderate (200-300 mg) or high
(more than 300 mg) levels of caffeine. As there can be many causes of miscarriage, it is hard to know if an exposure or
other factors are the cause of a miscarriage.
Does caffeine increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like caffeine, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy. Caffeine has not been shown to increase the chance of birth
defects.
Caffeine
September 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
Does consuming products with caffeine in pregnancy increase the chance of other
pregnancy-related problems?
Most studies find no clear evidence that low (less than 200 mg) to moderate (200-300 mg) of caffeine use during
pregnancy can increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems, such as preterm delivery (birth before week
37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). High doses (more than 300 mg)
of caffeine are not well studied.
I need to take caffeine throughout my entire pregnancy. Will it cause withdrawal symptoms
in my baby after birth?
The use of caffeine during pregnancy can cause temporary symptoms in newborns soon after birth. These symptoms
are sometimes referred to as withdrawal. Large amounts of caffeine could affect babies in the same way as it does
adults. Some reports suggest that children exposed to more than 500 mg of caffeine per day in the third trimester of
pregnancy were more likely to have faster heart rates, shaking, increased breathing rate, and spend more time awake
in the days following birth. Not all babies exposed to caffeine will have these symptoms. It is important that your
healthcare providers know you are taking caffeine so that if symptoms occur your baby can get the care that is best
for them.
Does consuming products with caffeine in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for
the child?
Most studies find no effect on learning or behavior in young school-aged children who were exposed to caffeine during
pregnancy.
Breastfeeding while consuming products with caffeine:
Caffeine gets into breast milk in small amounts. It has been suggested to limit daily consumption to 300 mg/day or less
while breastfeeding. If you suspect the baby has any symptoms (agitation, irritability, trouble with sleeping, rapid heart
rate or tremor), contact the child’s healthcare provider. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your
breastfeeding questions.
If men consume products with caffeine, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of
birth defects?
Studies on caffeine and men’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) have reported mixed findings. The American
Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) states that caffeine consumption has no effect on a semen. In general,
exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information,
please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Caffeine
September 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, September 1, 2024.





Anxiety
March 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Anxiety
This sheet is about having anxiety in a pregnancy or while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is anxiety?
Anxiety is excessive and uncontrollable worry. It is common to worry about your pregnancy or your baby’s health.
Worry becomes an anxiety disorder when the thoughts are frequent, time-consuming, intrusive and irrational. Intrusive
thoughts are unwelcome thoughts or images that are upsetting. Irrational worry means worrying about things that are
unlikely to happen.
Almost everyone can experience anxiety at some point in their life. It can be hard to tell the difference between what
is the usual pregnancy-related worry and what is excessive worry or an anxiety disorder. However, when anxiety
interferes with everyday activities, it might be Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD), one type of an anxiety disorder.
GAD occurs in about 8.5%–10.5% of women who are pregnant.
What are the symptoms of anxiety?
Anxiety could lead to difficulty sleeping, feeling tired or irritated, and/or lacking focus. People with anxiety might also
feel like their heart is pounding or beating fast, or they might start to sweat, tremble or shake, or feel short of breath,
or have diarrhea or constipation. During anxiety attacks (also known as panic attacks), people might have fears of
passing out, dying, or of losing control or “going crazy.”
I think I just worry too much. I don’t want to tell anyone. Should I tell my healthcare
provider?
Yes. If you think that you worry too much, or your partner, friends or family have told you that you are worrying too
much, the best thing to do is to tell one of your healthcare providers. Many people with anxiety spend a lot of time
worrying about seeking help which can delay treatment. Finding ways to lower your levels of anxiety can help you
have a healthy pregnancy. Around half (50%) of individuals with an anxiety disorder also have some symptoms of
depression. Having anxiety during your pregnancy increases the chance of depression during pregnancy and of having
a mood disorder after the baby is born (postpartum mood disorder). Discussing anxiety with your healthcare providers
can help during and after a pregnancy. For information on depression, please see that fact sheet at:
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/depression-pregnancy/.
I have been taking medication for anxiety and I am trying to get pregnant. Should I stop my
medication?
Sometimes when women find out they are pregnant, they think about changing how they take their medication, or
stopping their medication altogether. However, it is important to talk with your healthcare providers before making
any changes to how you take your medication. Stopping a medication that is working to treat your anxiety might cause
symptoms to restart or to get worse. Your healthcare providers can talk with you about the benefits of treating your
condition and the risks of untreated illness during pregnancy.
I have anxiety. Can it make it harder for me to become pregnant?
It is not known if anxiety could make it harder to get pregnant.
Does having anxiety increase the chance for miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Studies have not been done to see
if anxiety increases the chance for miscarriage.
Does having anxiety increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. It is unlikely
that anxiety alone is able to increase the chance of birth defects. However, since it is difficult to measure anxiety and
women respond differently to stress, it is difficult to study the effects of anxiety on pregnancy. For information on
Anxiety
March 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
stress, please see this fact sheet at: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/stress-pregnancy/.
Does having anxiety in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy related
problems?
Untreated anxiety might contribute to pregnancy related problems, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or
low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). There have also been some studies
that reported untreated anxiety in pregnancy might increase the chance for poor physical growth, delayed gross-motor
(large muscle) development, and asthma in early childhood.
Does having anxiety in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
A few studies have found that poorly treated anxiety in pregnancy might affect early childhood development, including
weakened social, emotional, and communication skills.
Untreated anxiety can make it difficult to feel connected (bonded) with the baby both during pregnancy and after
delivery. Having a mental health disorder can increase the chance of postpartum mood disorders which can also
interfere with bonding with the baby. Having frequent negative thoughts can lead to less involvement with your baby.
Talk with your healthcare providers so that they can determine if you have an anxiety disorder (with or without
depression) and can then discuss ways to manage it.
What types of treatment are available for anxiety?
Specific types of talk therapy or counseling, relaxation techniques and mindfulness therapy can be effective for
treating or managing mild to moderate symptoms of anxiety. Some people benefit from exercise. Some people benefit
from medication. There may be other treatments available, as well. Talk to your healthcare provider to plan out the
best treatment for your anxiety.
If I take medication for anxiety during my pregnancy, will it harm the baby?
There are many different medication options for treating anxiety in pregnancy. Generally, studies have not found an
increased chance for birth defects for many of these medications. For more information about specific medications,
please see our medication fact sheets at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets-parent/ or contact MotherToBaby to
speak with an information specialist about your specific medications. MotherToBaby also has a general information
page on anxiety in pregnancy and breastfeeding, including links to fact sheets and other resources:
https://mothertobaby.org/pregnancy-breastfeeding-exposures/anxiety/.
Breastfeeding if I have anxiety or need to take medication:
Having anxiety does not need to keep you from breastfeeding. For some women, breastfeeding can feel overwhelming.
Find supportive friends or family members who can help you. You can also talk to your healthcare provider about
different treatment options, including therapy and medications. If you and your healthcare provider decide that
medication is the best treatment for you, there are medications that can be used while breastfeeding. For more
information about medications, please see our medication fact sheets at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets-parent/
or contact MotherToBaby to speak with an information specialist about specific medications. Be sure to talk to your
healthcare provider about all of your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has anxiety, can it make it harder to get a woman to get pregnant or increase the
chance of birth defects?
Some reports have found that men with anxiety might have lower fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). Anxiety
(and depression) have been shown to lower semen volume and sperm density. In general, exposures that men have
are unlikely to increase the risks to a pregnancy. A partner’s emotional well-being is important, not only for their
personal health, but also for the health and support of their partner and children. Men who have symptoms of anxiety
should talk to their healthcare provider to plan out the best treatment for their anxiety. For more information, please
see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here to view references.
Anxiety
March 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, March 1, 2024.





Asthma
April 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Asthma
This sheet is about having asthma in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on published
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is asthma?
Asthma is a condition that causes inflammation (swelling and tightening) in the airways of the lungs. When an asthma
attack happens, it is hard for air to pass through the lungs. This can lead to symptoms like wheezing, coughing, and
trouble breathing. Asthma is often managed with medication in inhalers for fast symptom relief (when an attack
happens) and/or with daily medication to help lower inflammation (to prevent attacks).
Asthma is one of the most common chronic diseases among people of reproductive age. For some people, asthma
attacks might be triggered by things like breathing in cold air, cold/flu viruses, heavy exercise, chemicals, smoke, and
allergies. Avoiding triggers and having a good medical plan in place can lower the number of asthma attacks you have.
Asthma that is not well controlled can increase the chance of problems in pregnancy, so it is important to talk with
your healthcare provider about the best way to treat your asthma.
I have asthma. What should I talk about with my healthcare team before I get pregnant?
It is important to talk to your healthcare team about plans for treating your condition before and during pregnancy,
during delivery, and after delivery. If possible, talk with your healthcare team before getting pregnant. If your
pregnancy is unplanned, contact your healthcare providers as soon as you find out you are pregnant.
Things to talk about with your healthcare team include:
Ways to monitor your pregnancy and your asthma symptoms, and ways to avoid triggers.
Any medications or vitamins you should take during pregnancy.
Getting any necessary vaccines before and during pregnancy. Many vaccines can be given in pregnancy. For
more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet on vaccines at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/vaccines-pregnancy/.
Any other questions or concerns you have.
Can having asthma make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if having asthma can make it harder to get pregnant. Some studies have suggested that it might take
longer for people with asthma to get pregnant, especially when asthma is not well controlled. Other studies have not
shown that it is harder for people with asthma to get pregnant.
Will pregnancy affect my asthma?
It is hard to know how a person’s asthma will act during pregnancy. About one-third of people with asthma who are
pregnant will have improvement in their symptoms, about one-third will stay the same, and about one-third will get
worse. It appears that the more severe asthma is at the time of conception, the more likely it is that the symptoms will
get worse during pregnancy. It is important that a person’s asthma is well controlled before getting pregnant or as
soon as possible.
Does having asthma increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. A few studies have suggested a
Asthma
April 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
small increased chance of miscarriage; however, these studies did not look at other factors that can cause
miscarriage. Most studies have not shown an increased chance of miscarriage in people with asthma.
Does having asthma increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like asthma, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
Some studies have suggested an increased chance of birth defects in people with asthma, while others have not. In
these studies, it is hard to know if the birth defects found were due to asthma, the medications needed to control
asthma, or other factors. Most people who are pregnant and have asthma have babies without birth defects. If there is
an increased chance of birth defects from asthma itself, it is expected to be low.
If a person who is pregnant has trouble breathing, they will take in less oxygen. This could lead to a lower amount of
oxygen getting to the pregnancy, which could cause problems in organ development and other complications.
Does having asthma increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Asthma that is not well controlled during pregnancy is linked to higher rates of pregnancy complications, such as
preterm delivery (birth before week 37), low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at
birth), higher rates of C-section, problems with the placenta, hemorrhage (blood loss), high blood pressure, and
preeclampsia (high blood pressure and problems with organs, such as the kidneys). People with well-controlled asthma
during pregnancy are not expected to have a greater chance for pregnancy-related problems than people without
asthma.
Does having asthma affect future behavior or learning for the child?
It is not known if having asthma in pregnancy can increase the chance of behavior or learning issues for the child.
Can taking medication for asthma during pregnancy increase the chance of birth defects or
other pregnancy-related problems?
Most asthma medications have not been shown to increase the chance of birth defects or other pregnancy-related
problems. It is important that your asthma be as well controlled as possible before, during, and after pregnancy. Talk
with your healthcare provider before making any changes to how you take your medication(s) and contact
MotherToBaby with questions about your specific medications. For a list of MotherToBaby fact sheets related to
asthma please see: https://mothertobaby.org/pregnancy-breastfeeding-exposures/asthma/.
Breastfeeding while I have asthma:
Having asthma is not expected to affect a person’s ability to breastfeed.
Can I breastfeed while taking my medications for asthma?
Most asthma medications can be taken while breastfeeding. Contact MotherToBaby with questions about your specific
medications. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has asthma, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Studies have not been done to see if asthma could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a partner pregnant). Asthma in
males is not expected to increase the chance of birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have
are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal
Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
MotherToBaby is currently conducting a study looking at asthma and the medications used to treat asthma in
pregnancy. If you would like to learn more, please call 1-877-311-8972 or visit https://mothertobaby.org/join-study/.
Please click here for references.
Asthma
April 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2025.




Depression
January 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Depression
This sheet is about having depression in a pregnancy or while breastfeeding. This information should not take the
place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is depression?
Depression is a serious medical illness. There are different types of depression, such as major depression, persistent
depressive disorder, perinatal depression, seasonal affective disorder, and depression with symptoms of psychosis.
Pregnancy can trigger the development of depression in some women (perinatal depression). This may be due to
changes in hormone levels during pregnancy and the stress that comes with this major life event.
Depression can change how someone feels, thinks, and acts. The most common symptoms of depression are strong
feelings of sadness and not being able to feel pleasure or happiness over a period of time. Other symptoms can
include anxiety, irritability, trouble concentrating, feeling very tired (fatigue), and thoughts of death or self-harm.
Physical symptoms of depression can include increased heart rate, appetite changes, stomach pain, and headaches.
Treatment for depression can include counseling, psychotherapy, and / or medications.
I think I have depression and I am pregnant. What should I do?
Contact your healthcare provider as soon as possible. If you are in crisis (you feel you may hurt yourself, your
pregnancy, or someone else) and need help, call or text 988 and/or seek emergency medical care at once. You are not
alone in what you are experiencing and there is help available.
Healthcare & mental health providers can work with you to create a plan for the health of you and your baby. In
addition, share your feelings with your partner, family, friends, or other people you trust so you can receive support.
Research suggests social support is associated with less severe perinatal depressive symptoms.
If you do not have a provider or can’t reach them, try calling the National Maternal Mental Health Hotline (NMMHH) at
1-833-TLC-MAMA (1-833-852-6262). The Hotline is free, confidential, and available 24/7 in English and Spanish. For
even more resources and support services, please visit our mental health resource page at:
https://mothertobaby.org/pregnancy-breastfeeding-exposures/mental-health/.
I have depression and I am planning on getting pregnant. Is there anything I need to know?
Talk to your healthcare providers about your plans to get pregnant so they can review your current health and
treatments. Sometimes, changes in treatment may be recommended before or during pregnancy.
I have depression. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Some studies suggest having depression might make it harder to get pregnant.
Does having depression increase the chance for miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Some studies have reported a
higher chance for miscarriage when depression is untreated or poorly treated in pregnancy.
Does having depression increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Depression
itself is not expected to increase the chance for birth defects above the background risk. However, depression during
pregnancy should be treated. Many antidepressant medications have been studied in pregnancy and have not been
linked to a higher chance for birth defects. For questions about specific medications and pregnancy, talk with your
healthcare provider or a MotherToBaby specialist.
Would having depression increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Some studies have reported a higher chance for preterm delivery (birth before week 37), low birth weight, babies who
are smaller than expected, and preeclampsia (dangerously high blood pressure in pregnancy) when depression is left
untreated in pregnancy. Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-related disorder, which can lead to preterm delivery and
Depression
January 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
complications for the woman who is pregnant and for her baby. If the woman who is pregnant has depression, they
may also have changes in their sleeping or eating patterns.
Does having depression in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Some studies have shown that untreated or poorly depression in pregnancy may negatively affect a child’s behavior or
development.
I do not want to take my medication for depression during my pregnancy. My healthcare
provider said this could be worse for my baby and me. Is this true?
Studies have found that women who are pregnant with depression typically have better outcomes for themselves and
their babies if they are getting effective treatment compared to having untreated depression.
Stopping your medication could lead to a return of your symptoms of depression (relapse). One study found that
women who stopped their medications for major depression had a 5 times greater risk of relapse during pregnancy
compared to those who stayed on their medications. Restarting the antidepressant medication lowered the chance of a
relapse, but it did not completely prevent the relapse in all cases. A relapse of depression during pregnancy could
increase the risk of pregnancy complications.
It is important to talk with your healthcare providers before making any changes to how you take your medication.
Your healthcare providers can talk with you about the benefits of treating your condition and the risks of untreated
illness during pregnancy. Consider your personal feelings, the severity of your symptoms, any past hospitalizations,
how quickly symptoms have returned in the past if you have ever gone off medication, and how quickly you respond
when you restart medications.
If you decide to stop your antidepressant medication, your healthcare provider may suggest that you slowly lower your
dose before you stop completely. This is to help prevent possible withdrawal symptoms that some people experience
when they suddenly stop taking antidepressants. It is not known what effects, if any, withdrawal could have on a
pregnancy.
What about other treatments (besides medication) for depression during my pregnancy?
Other evidence-based treatments for perinatal depression include talk therapy (psychotherapy/counseling) and
support groups such as Postpartum Support International (PSI).
Most herbal remedies, supplements, or other nontraditional therapies have not been studied enough to know if or how
they might affect a pregnancy. It is important to discuss any therapies that you are considering with your obstetric and
mental healthcare providers before you use them. Please see our fact sheet on Herbal Supplements here:
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/. You may also contact MotherToBaby to speak with a
specialist about specific treatments/therapies and available research on use during pregnancy.
I feel so sad and have so little energy that I am having trouble going to my prenatal care
appointments. Can this affect my baby?
Regular prenatal appointments can help to improve outcomes for you and your baby. It is not uncommon for people
with depression to not feel motivated or have the energy to participate in parts of their day-to-day life, including going
to your appointments. Studies have found that women with mental health conditions, including depression, go to less
than half of their prenatal care appointments. Studies have also shown higher rates of preterm births and deaths in the
newborn period in the babies of those who did not have appropriate prenatal care.
Do women with depression during pregnancy have a higher chance of having postpartum
depression or mood disorders?
One of the most serious effects of not treating depression during pregnancy is the increased chance for a postpartum
mood disorder, including postpartum depression (PPD). PPD is depression following childbirth. About 1 in 10 (10%) to 2
in 10 (20%) women experience PPD. Several studies have shown a higher chance for developing PPD among women
who were depressed during their pregnancy. Having PPD might make it harder to take care of and bond with the baby.
This might affect the baby’s development and behavior.
Depression
January 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
Breastfeeding while I have depression / postpartum depression:
Breastfeeding has benefits for the health of both the woman who is breastfeeding and the baby. Studies have found
that women with depression during pregnancy tend to breastfeed their babies for a shorter time. Breastfeeding may
lower the chance of postpartum depression or reduce symptoms of depression.
Some women may struggle with depression while breastfeeding. Find people who are supportive such as family,
friends, your healthcare provider, or a lactation consultant. You can contact a MotherToBaby specialist to talk about
medications you might be taking while breastfeeding. Your mental health is important. Ask for help if you have any
concerns. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all of your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has depression, can it make it harder to get a woman pregnant or increase the
chance of birth defects?
Some reports have found that men with depression can have a harder time getting a woman pregnant. Depression and
anxiety in men have been shown to lower semen volume and sperm density. Some studies have found that 2% to 9%
of men can experience depression during a partner’s pregnancy. Emotional well-being is important, not only for a
person’s health but also for the health and support of their partner and children. Anyone who has symptoms of
depression should seek appropriate care. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to increase the risks to a
pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, January 1, 2024.









Fever/Hyperthermia
February 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Fever/Hyperthermia
This sheet is about fever and hyperthermia in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare providers.
What is fever and hyperthermia?
A person’s typical body temperature is around 98.6oF (37oC). Fever refers to a temporary rise in body temperature
over 101oF (38.3oC). Infection is one of the most common causes of fever. Autoimmune conditions, some cancers,
and allergic reactions can also cause fever.
Hyperthermia, or overheating, is a rise in body temperature that happens when the body absorbs more heat than it
releases. The most common causes of hyperthermia are heat stroke and severe reactions to medications (malignant
hyperthermia). Long exposure to hot temperatures on hot days can also cause hyperthermia. Hot days are often
described as being 86oF (30oC) or higher. Extreme exercise or use of hot tubs or saunas might also cause
hyperthermia.
A raise in body temperature due to fever or hyperthermia can be of concern in early pregnancy, especially if it lasts for
a long period of time. Talk with your healthcare providers to learn if a fever from an infection or illness needs to be
treated with fever-reducing medications. Your healthcare provider can decide if the illness causing your fever needs to
be treated as well. In some cases, hyperthermia may require immediate medical attention.
I have fever or hyperthermia. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if having a fever or hyperthermia could make it harder to get pregnant.
Does having a fever or hyperthermia increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Some studies suggest there might
be an increased chance for miscarriage with increase in body temperature in pregnancy. Other studies have not
suggested an increased chance of miscarriage. As there can be many causes of miscarriage, it is hard to know if a
fever, hyperthermia, underlying illness causing a fever, or other factors are the cause of a miscarriage.
Does having a fever or hyperthermia increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like fever / hyperthermia,
might increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
Several studies have reported a small chance for birth defects called neural tube defects (NTDs) in babies of people
who had fevers or hyperthermia before the 6th week of pregnancy. Neural tube defects occur when the spinal cord or
brain does not form properly. High body temperatures that happen after the 6th week of pregnancy are not expected
to increase the chance for NTDs.
A few studies have reported a small increased chance for other birth defects when fever or hyperthermia occurs in
early pregnancy (before week 12), especially if the fever is untreated. These include heart defects, abdominal wall
defects (an opening in the abdomen through which organs such as intestines or stomach can stick out), or oral clefts
(an opening in the upper lip [cleft lip] and/or the roof of the mouth [cleft palate]). However, there are also studies that
have not found these results. As there can be many causes of birth defects, it is hard to know if a fever, hyperthermia,
the illness that is causing a fever, or other factors are the cause of birth defects.
Does having a fever or hyperthermia increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
It is not known if having a fever or hyperthermia can cause other pregnancy complications. Some underlying illnesses
or health conditions that may cause fever could increase the chance for pregnancy-related problems such as preterm
delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth).
Fever/Hyperthermia
February 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
Does having a fever or hyperthermia in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the
child?
A few studies have reported a small increased chance for problems such as attention deficit disorder (ADHD) and
autism when a person had a fever in pregnancy, especially if the fever was untreated. As there can be many things
that affect future behavior and learning for a child, it is hard to know if a fever, underlying infection, underlying
medical condition, or other factors were the cause of these problems.
Does taking medication for fever during pregnancy cause birth defects or other pregnancy
complications?
The most common medications used to treat a fever are acetaminophen/paracetamol (Tylenol®) or ibuprofen
(Motrin®, Advil®, and Nuprin®).
Most healthcare providers consider acetaminophen to be the fever-reducer of choice during pregnancy. It has been
suggested to use only as needed and at the lowest effective dose, unless your healthcare provider has instructed you
to use differently. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet on acetaminophen at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/acetaminophen-pregnancy/.
Ibuprofen is in a class of medications called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). It has been recommended
to avoid the use of NSAIDs, like ibuprofen, after week 20 of pregnancy, unless your healthcare provider feels it is
necessary. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet on ibuprofen at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/ibuprofen-pregnancy/.
Talk to your healthcare provider about the best way to treat your fever. You can contact MotherToBaby with your
questions about specific medication.
How do I prevent fever or hyperthermia during pregnancy?
Fever is usually a sign of another underlying illness or infection, including cold and flu. Limiting exposure to infections,
washing hands often, and staying up to date on vaccinations are some of the best ways to prevent illness and possible
fever. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet on vaccines at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/vaccines-pregnancy/. Hot tub or sauna use during pregnancy should be limited. If
you live in or are visiting a hot climate, be sure you take precautions and limit the amount of time you spend in the
heat.
What screenings or tests are available to see if my pregnancy has birth defects or other
issues?
Prenatal ultrasounds can be used to screen for some birth defects, such as neural tube defects or congenital heart
defects. A blood test looking for a chemical called alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is also available to screen for certain types of
neural tube defects. Talk with your healthcare provider about prenatal screenings or testing that are available to you.
Breastfeeding while I have a fever or hyperthermia:
Having a fever or hyperthermia does not seem to affect the ability to breastfeed. If your fever is due to an illness,
there are likely antibodies in the breast milk to help lower the chance that the baby will get sick. Be sure to wash your
hands often and wear a mask or try not to breathe directly on the baby’s face while nursing. For more information
about the use of specific medications during breastfeeding, contact a MotherToBaby expert. Be sure to talk to your
healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has a fever or hyperthermia, could it affect his fertility or increase the chance of
birth defects?
Heat can affect the process of making sperm (spermatogenesis). Studies looking at high temperature to the testes
have found lower sperm production, which might make it harder to get a woman pregnant. Fever in males at the time
of conception or in early pregnancy, or a male’s use of fever-reducing medication, has not been associated with an
increased chance of birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase
risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Fever/Hyperthermia
February 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, February 1, 2025.









Physical Trauma
February 1, 2024
page 1 of 2
Physical Trauma
This sheet is about exposure to physical trauma in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
available published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is trauma?
Trauma can include damage to the body and/or the mind. Trauma that is caused by sudden harm to the body can
include being in a car crash, falling, being burned, or experiencing physical violence. This sheet will focus on physical
trauma. More information on stress can be found in our fact sheet at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/stress-pregnancy/.
It is important that you are physically and emotionally safe before, during, and after pregnancy. Trauma can cause
long-term physical and mental health issues. If you have or are currently experiencing physical trauma talk with your
healthcare provider or other trusted source, such as the National Domestic Violence hotline at 1−800−799−7233
(SAFE) or https://www.thehotline.org/.
Pregnancy outcomes after physical trauma can vary based on many factors, including the type and severity of the
trauma, when it happened during pregnancy, and where on the body the trauma occurred. For questions about your
specific situation, contact a MotherToBaby specialist.
I have experienced physical trauma. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Some types of physical trauma might make it harder to get pregnant. For example, physical trauma that damages the
uterus might affect fertility (ability to get pregnant).
One study found women with traumatic brain injury were more likely to experience changes to their menstrual cycle,
which could affect fertility.
Does experiencing physical trauma increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Some types of trauma, such as
trauma that causes damage to the placenta or uterus, can increase the chance of miscarriage. (The uterus is where
the pregnancy is located. The placenta is the organ that grows inside the uterus that provides oxygen and nutrients to
the pregnancy).
Does experiencing physical trauma increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. It is not known
if physical trauma increases the chance of birth defects above the background risk. There are reports of babies born
with and without birth defects following physical trauma. One study of 62 women who were treated for car accidents
during the first 3 months of pregnancy did not find an increased chance of birth defects.
Does experiencing physical trauma in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-
related problems?
Women who have experienced physical trauma during pregnancy might have an increased chance for other
pregnancy-related problems, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) and infants with low birth weight
(weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). Certain physical trauma can also increase the chance
of placental abruption (when the placenta pulls away from the uterus). The placenta can separate from the uterus
when there is severe trauma to the stomach area. If this happens, this can cause pregnancy loss or stillbirth.
Does experiencing physical trauma in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the
child?
Whether there are effects on future behavior or learning might be related to the severity of the trauma and whether
there was any injury to the developing brain. One study looking at 16 women who were pregnant and exposed to
mostly minor injuries from things like a car accident or fall after 20 weeks of pregnancy did not find unusual
development at the time of birth and at 1 year of age.
Physical Trauma
February 1, 2024
page 2 of 2
What should I do if I experience physical trauma during pregnancy?
Call 911 or go to an emergency room for treatment of serious bodily injuries. Healthcare providers can treat injuries
and check the progress of the pregnancy. Continue to follow up for monitoring with your healthcare provider. If you or
someone you know is experiencing any type of violence, please call the National Domestic Violence Hotline
1−800−799−7233 (SAFE).
Breastfeeding after physical trauma:
It is important to weigh the benefits and risks of breastfeeding following a recent or past physically traumatic
experience. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man experiences trauma, can it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Trauma that harms the scrotum or testicles (the body parts that help to make sperm) might affect a man’s fertility
(ability to get a woman pregnant). In general, exposures that men have had are unlikely to increase the risks to a
pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet on Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here to view references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, February 1, 2024.








Stress
July 1, 2023
page 1 of 3
Stress
This sheet is about stress in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available published
literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is stress?
Stress is the way the body reacts to something that is unusual, dangerous, unknown, or disturbing. Stress can come
from any event or thought. When under stress, the body undergoes physical, chemical, and emotional changes. Almost
anything can cause stress, and everyone experiences it at some point in their life. Stress can make people feel
frustrated, overwhelmed, angry, or nervous. Everyone deals with stress in their own way. A very stressful situation for
one person may not be all that stressful for another. Because we all have different reactions to stress, it is hard to
study how stress may affect pregnancy or breastfeeding.
What are some of the symptoms of stress?
Physical symptoms: Chest pain, fast heart rate, breathing problems, headaches, vision problems, teeth grinding,
dizziness, fatigue, stomach problems, changes in eating partners, and muscle aches.
Mental symptoms: Confusion, memory loss, nightmares, problems focusing, having a hard time making
decisions, and changes in sleeping patterns.
Emotional symptoms: Feelings of anxiety, guilt, grief, fear, irritability, worry, frustration, loneliness, or being
overwhelmed. May include periods of anger or crying.
Social symptoms: Staying away from friends and family, eating too much or too little, drinking too much alcohol,
and using drugs.
Does stress affect health?
In small amounts, stress can be positive and healthy. However, being under a lot of stress over time might affect
health and well-being. Stress can increase a person’s chance of developing conditions like high blood pressure or
depression. Stress might also cause existing medical problems to worsen. For example, if someone has diabetes and is
under stress, it may be hard for them to keep their blood sugar levels under control.
If you are having symptoms of stress, talk with your healthcare provider. It is important to get help from a mental
health professional, counselors, or other qualified healthcare provider before your stress level becomes out of control.
They can help you find the resources and assistance needed to cope with stress.
Do medications used to treat potential health effects of stress, like high blood pressure,
ulcers, or depression, increase risks to my pregnancy?
Many medications can be used during pregnancy. In fact, it may be more harmful to a pregnancy if some conditions
are not treated or well-controlled. Contact MotherToBaby to talk with a specialist about specific medication(s) during
pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Can stress make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Studies that suggest stress might make it harder to get pregnant. However, these studies have limitations and are not
able to give clear guidelines on how different amounts of stress or the length of time a woman is experiencing stress
may affect their ability to get pregnant. If you are struggling getting pregnant and this is causing you stress, be sure to
talk with your healthcare provider.
I just found out that I am pregnant. What are some ways to lower my stress level?
Don’t be afraid to ask for help.
Talk about your feelings with people you trust including friends, family, and/or healthcare/mental health
professionals.
Stress
July 1, 2023
page 2 of 3
Follow good health habits: avoid smoking, drinking alcohol, or taking non-prescription drug; take your
prescribed medication as directed; eat a healthy diet; drink plenty of water; rest; and follow an exercise plan
approved by your healthcare provider.
Try to have fun and do things that you enjoy.
Consider practicing mindfulness or doing meditation.
Does stress increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. It is unknown if stress on its own
increases the chance of miscarriage. While studies suggest a lot of stress during pregnancy could increase the chance
of miscarriage, it is hard to know if the increased chance is from stress alone or if it is due to other factors.
Does stress increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. It is hard to
measure stress and to study its effects on pregnancy. However, it is unlikely that stress alone will increase the chance
of birth defects.
Does stress in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Some studies suggest that stress can contribute to preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight
(weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). However, because everyone experiences and responds
to stressful situations in their own way, there is no clear information on if stress alone increases the chance of these
complications.
Does stress in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Some studies have linked stress during pregnancy to an increased chance of the child(ren) developing mental health
and behavioral problems later in life. However, there is not enough information to know if it is only stress or other
factors that can increase the chance for these issues.
Breastfeeding and stress:
Stress may cause problems with breastfeeding. For some women, breastfeeding itself can feel overwhelming and
stressful. It can be helpful for a woman who is breastfeeding to have support while nursing. This can include a
breastfeeding support group, a lactation specialist, and/or friends or family members who can give help and support. If
you are having trouble breastfeeding, please contact your healthcare provider or your baby’s pediatrician. Be sure to
talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man is stressed, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Some studies have suggested that stress can affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). In general,
exposures that men have are unlikely to increase the risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the
MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Stress
July 1, 2023
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, July 1, 2023.









COVID-19
December 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
COVID-19
This sheet is about having a COVID-19 infection in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
available published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare
provider.
What is COVID-19?
COVID-19 (Coronavirus Disease 2019) is an illness caused by a virus called SARS-CoV-2. The virus spreads mostly by
close person-to-person contact. When an infected person breathes, talks, coughs, or sneezes, the virus can spread to
others who are nearby.
The most common symptoms of COVID-19 include fever, cough, and shortness of breath. Other symptoms might
include chills, muscle or body aches, headache, sore throat, new loss of taste or smell, runny nose, nausea or vomiting,
and diarrhea. Some people have only mild symptoms or no symptoms at all (are asymptomatic), but they could still
spread the virus to other people.
Women who are pregnant or were recently pregnant have a higher chance of getting very sick if they get COVID-19.
Studies have shown higher chances of hospitalization, admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), and death from
COVID-19 during pregnancy.
How can I help prevent getting COVID-19?
Staying up to date with recommended COVID-19 vaccines is the best way to protect yourself and others from
COVID-19. MotherToBaby has fact sheets about COVID-19 vaccines at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/covid-19-mrna/ and
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/covid-19-protein-subunit-vaccine/.
Other ways to help protect yourself and others include wearing a mask in public, avoiding large indoor gatherings,
avoiding contact with people who might have COVID-19, and washing your hands often. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) has information about prevention at https://www.cdc.gov/covid/prevention/index.html.
What should I do if I get sick with COVID-19 while I am pregnant?
If you are pregnant and have symptoms of COVID-19 or test positive for COVID-19, be sure to tell your healthcare
team. Your healthcare provider might recommend an antiviral medication to help lower the chance of getting very
sick. Antiviral medications work best if taken early in the course of the illness. MotherToBaby has a fact sheet about
one kind of antiviral medication used for COVID-19 at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/nirmatrelvir-ritonavir-paxlovid/. You can also talk to your healthcare provider
about the best way to treat symptoms such as fever (see the section of this fact sheet about birth defects and fever for
more information). While you are sick, stay home and avoid close contact with others to help prevent passing the virus
to other people.
I have COVID-19. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if having COVID-19 can make it harder to get pregnant.
Does having COVID-19 increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Studies on COVID-19 infections in
pregnancy have not suggested a higher chance of miscarriage compared to the general population.
Does having COVID-19 increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like COVID-19, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy. Some studies have observed higher rates of some kinds of birth
defects in infants born to women with a COVID-19 infection in pregnancy. Other studies have not found a higher
chance of birth defects. Overall, the research does not find a clear link between COVID-19 and any specific birth defect
COVID-19
December 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
or pattern of birth defects.
Fever is a possible symptom of COVID-19. A high fever in the first trimester can increase the chance of certain birth
defects. Acetaminophen has been recommended to reduce fever in pregnancy. If you get sick with COVID-19 or any
other illness and develop a fever, talk with your healthcare provider to confirm if taking acetaminophen is okay for you.
For more information about fever and pregnancy, see the MotherToBaby fact sheet about hyperthermia at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/hyperthermia-pregnancy/.
Does having COVID-19 increase the chance of other pregnancy related problems?
Studies have shown that women who are pregnant or recently pregnant and get COVID-19 have higher chances of
becoming very sick, being admitted to intensive care, and needing to be put on a ventilator (machine that helps you
breathe). Some studies have also reported a higher chance of death. The chance of these outcomes can be higher
among women who also have other underlying health conditions, such as obesity, pre-pregnancy diabetes, and/or
chronic hypertension. Just as in the general population, pregnant women who are up to date on COVID-19 vaccines are
less likely to get infected, and less likely to get severely ill, be hospitalized, or die from a COVID-19 infection.
Studies have reported higher chances of pregnancy-related problems following COVID-19 infection in pregnancy,
including preterm delivery (birth before 37 weeks of pregnancy), stillbirth, preeclampsia (dangerously high blood
pressure), blood clots, and the need for an emergency c-section. Some studies suggest the virus can infect the
placenta (a condition called placentitis) or cause changes to the placenta, which can lead to problems with how well
the placenta works to support the pregnancy and fetal growth and development. Having COVID-19 might also make it
harder to manage other health conditions that are common in pregnancy, such as other infections or high blood
pressure. Women who are up to date with COVID-19 vaccines in pregnancy are less likely to experience pregnancy
complications from a COVID-19 infection than women who are not up to date.
Can the virus that causes COVID-19 pass to the fetus during pregnancy or at the time of
delivery?
The virus can pass from a woman who is pregnant to the fetus during pregnancy, but this appears to be rare. The
chance of the baby getting the virus during or soon after birth might be higher if the pregnant woman has an active
infection at the time of delivery. Most infants who test positive soon after delivery have only mild or no symptoms and
fully recover from the virus. Severe illness might be more likely in infants who are born preterm or have other health
problems.
Does having COVID-19 in pregnancy affect future learning or behavior for the child?
Studies have looked at the development of children born to women who had COVID-19 in pregnancy. A few studies
have reported a higher chance of issues related to motor (movement) skills and speech and language in children up to
2 ½ years of age. Other studies have found no differences in development, learning, or behavior up to 2 years of age.
Since many factors can affect children’s development (such as their home and school environment and other possible
exposures in pregnancy), it is not clear if having COVID-19 in pregnancy affects long-term development in children.
Breastfeeding while having COVID-19:
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been found to pass into breast milk. There have not been any reported cases
of infants getting COVID-19 through breast milk. Women are often encouraged to continue breastfeeding or providing
breast milk even when they are sick with a virus, such as the flu.
Women who are breastfeeding while sick with COVID-19 can help prevent passing the virus to their babies by washing
their hands frequently and wearing a mask while nursing. They can also consider pumping milk for someone else to
feed their baby while they recover. CDC has information on COVID-19 and breastfeeding at
https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding-special-circumstances/hcp/illnesses-conditions/covid-19.html. Be sure to talk to
your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has COVID-19, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
A COVID-19 infection can cause a temporary decrease in the number and motility (movement) of sperm in some men.
These changes in sperm could affect fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). In most cases, the sperm are expected
to return to normal after full recovery from the infection. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to increase
risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet on Paternal Exposures at
COVID-19
December 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, December 1, 2024.



Dengue
June 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Dengue
This sheet is about having dengue in a pregnancy or while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is dengue?
Dengue is a viral disease caused by 4 related viruses called: dengue-1, dengue-2, dengue-3, and dengue-4. Most
people are exposed to a dengue virus through being bitten by an infected mosquito. Less common exposures can
come from blood transfusions, organ transplants, or needlestick injuries. Dengue transmission through sexual
intercourse has not been confirmed.
Dengue symptoms can range from mild to severe. Symptoms reported with mild dengue include fever (temporary rise
in body temperature over 101oF [38.3oC]), severe headache, pain behind the eyes, muscle and joint pain, nausea,
vomiting, swollen glands, and rash. Mild symptoms usually start 4 to 10 days after infection and can last for 2 to 7
days. A severe case of dengue can become fatal. Symptoms of severe dengue can include severe abdominal pain,
persistent vomiting, rapid breathing, bleeding from gums and nose, fatigue (being very tired), restlessness, blood in
vomit or stool, being very thirsty, pallor (changes in skin tone, such as becoming pale, ashen, gray or yellowish in
color), cold skin, and feeling weak. If you think you have any of the severe symptoms, please seek care from a
healthcare provider right away.
I’ve had dengue once. Can I get it again?
Dengue can be caused by 4 different viruses. If you have had dengue, your body may develop protection (immunity) to
the strain of virus that you had, so you should not be able to get dengue from that strain again. For example, if you
have been exposed to dengue-1 virus, it is unlikely you would get sick from exposure to dengue-1 virus again in the
future. However, you could be infected by another strain. People who have already had dengue and then get dengue
again have a higher chance of developing severe symptoms.
How can I protect my pregnancy from dengue?
Information to plan for travel can be found here: https://www.cdc.gov/dengue/prevention/index.html. If you travel to an
area or live in an area with a chance of dengue, prevent mosquito bites by using insect repellent and taking other
steps as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at
https://www.cdc.gov/mosquitoes/prevention/preventing-mosquito-bites-while-traveling.html. MotherToBaby has fact
sheets for Insect Repellents at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/insect-repellents/ and for DEET at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/deet-nn-ethyl-m-toluamide-pregnancy/.
After returning from an area with risk of dengue, prevent mosquito bites for 3 weeks so dengue is not spread to local
mosquitoes to reduce the chance of spreading the virus to other people:
https://www.cdc.gov/mosquitoes/prevention/index.html.
A dengue vaccine is approved for use in children aged 9 to 16 years old who meet certain criteria. However, the
vaccine is not approved for use in U.S. travelers who are visiting but not living in an area where dengue is common.
More information can be found here: https://www.cdc.gov/dengue/vaccine/index.html.
I have dengue. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if dengue can make it harder to get pregnant.
Dengue can be passed to a fetus during pregnancy. There are no official recommendations to wait to try and conceive
after having dengue. However, if you travel to an area with a risk of dengue, talk with your healthcare provider about
your travel and your plans to try and get pregnant.
Does having dengue increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. It is not known if dengue can
increase the chance of miscarriage. Some studies suggest that having dengue can increase the chance of miscarriage,
while other studies do not. As there can be many causes of miscarriage, it is hard to know if the infection, the
Dengue
June 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
medications used to treat the infection, or other factors are the cause of a miscarriage.
Does having dengue increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. It is not
known if having a dengue infection increases the chance for birth defects above the background risk.
Most studies do not suggest that having an active dengue infection increases the chance of birth defects above the
background risk. One report suggested cerebral malformations (changes in the way the brain is formed during
pregnancy) in babies born to women who had an active dengue infection during pregnancy. It is not clear what kind of
cerebral malformations were seen, and three cases are not enough to know if there is an increased chance of birth
defects. Also, this study did not report if the researchers looked at other factors (such as fever, other infections, age of
the pregnant woman, medications, or substance use). It is not possible to say whether dengue infection caused the
birth defects in this report.
Fever is a possible symptom of dengue. A high fever in the first trimester can increase the chance of certain birth
defects. Acetaminophen is usually recommended to reduce fever in pregnancy. If you have dengue and develop a
fever, talk with your healthcare provider to confirm that taking acetaminophen is the best way to lower it. For more
information about fever and pregnancy, see the MotherToBaby fact sheet about hyperthermia at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/hyperthermia-pregnancy/.
Does having dengue increase the chance of other pregnancy related problems?
Some studies suggest that dengue can increase the chance of preterm delivery (birth before week 37) and low birth
weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). Other complications, such as post-partum
hemorrhage (bleeding after delivery), kidney problems, respiratory distress syndrome, liver failure, pre-eclampsia
(high blood pressure and problems with organs, such as the kidneys, which can lead to seizures [called eclampsia]),
stillbirth, and death have been reported when a woman is infected with dengue during pregnancy.
Can the virus that causes dengue pass to the baby during pregnancy or at the time of
delivery?
When a pregnant woman passes an infection to the fetus, it is called vertical transmission. Vertical transmission has
been reported with dengue infection in pregnancy.
Vertical transmission can happen at any time in pregnancy but is more likely to happen when a woman gets the
infection close to delivery. The chance of passing dengue to the fetus can vary depending on many factors, including
the area of the world where the infection occurred, and the strains of dengue virus the pregnant person was infected
with. When a pregnant woman has severe dengue, or there is a lot of the virus present in the body, the chance of
vertical transmission might be higher.
Most newborns who get a dengue infection are asymptomatic (do not show symptoms) but can develop symptoms
within 14 days of birth (most commonly within the first week). Symptoms in infants can range from mild to severe.
Rash and bleeding problems have been reported in newborns. Breathing issues have been less commonly reported.
Not all pregnant women who have dengue will have these issues. Talk with your healthcare team if you have or think
you have dengue, so you and your pregnancy can be monitored as appropriate.
Does having dengue in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
It is not known if a dengue infection during pregnancy can affect future learning or behavior for the child. Children born
before 37 weeks of delivery (preterm) can have an increased chance of issues related to learning and development.
This makes it hard to know if the infection itself, a complication from the infection, or other factors are increasing the
chance of these issues.
Breastfeeding and dengue:
Dengue virus has been found in breast milk. Transmission of dengue virus through breast milk is not well studied.
There is one report of an infant having dengue symptoms (fever and bleeding) after being breastfed by their mother,
who had an active dengue infection. Due to the benefits of breastfeeding, women are encouraged to breastfeed even if
dengue infection is suspected.
Dengue
June 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
If you suspect the baby has any symptoms (fever or a low temperature [less than 36°C or 96.8°F], sleepiness,
irritability, rash, bleeding of the gums or nose, bruising, or vomiting) contact the child’s healthcare provider. Be sure to
talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has dengue, can it affect his fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
One study looking at 10 men with dengue found a decrease in the amount of sperm made 30 days after the start of
symptoms. The low sperm count was temporary. Having a low sperm count can make it harder to get a woman
pregnant. Studies have not been done to see if dengue could increase the chance of birth defects. In general,
exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information,
please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, June 1, 2024.














Exercise
March 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Exercise
This sheet is about exercise in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available published
literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
Can I exercise during pregnancy?
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that women who are pregnant without
medical or pregnancy complications should aim for 150 minutes (2 hours and 30 minutes) of moderate-intensity
exercise each week.
Moderate intensity means you are moving enough to raise your heart rate and start sweating. It also means that you
can still talk normally, but you cannot sing. The 150 minutes of exercise can be spread out over the days of the week.
For example, you can divide the 150 minutes into 30-minute workouts on 5 days of the week or into smaller 10-minute
workouts throughout each day. Women who are new to exercise can start out slowly and work up to 150 minutes a
week.
You may not be able to exercise while pregnant if you have experienced preterm delivery (birth before week 37), or
currently have ongoing vaginal bleeding, anemia (blood has a hard time carrying oxygen), uterine contractions, or
other pregnancy-related complications. Please check with your healthcare provider if you are unsure if you should
exercise during pregnancy. You should also check with your healthcare provider before starting or continuing an
exercise program if you have a history of medical concerns such as heart or lung problems or high blood pressure.
I exercise. Can it make it harder for me to become pregnant?
Light to moderate exercise is not expected to make it harder to become pregnant. Vigorous exercise, defined as
causing shortness of breath and can only speak 1-2 words, might reduce the number of times a woman has a
menstrual cycle (period); which would affect fertility. On the other hand, exercise might improve fertility in women
with polycystic ovarian syndrome and obesity.
Does exercise harm my pregnancy in any way?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Also,
miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. When done in moderation and
under the guidance of your healthcare provider, exercise is not expected to increase the chance of miscarriage, birth
defects, or preterm delivery. Studies show no relationship between exercise and distress or heart rate changes in a
fetus. One study found that moderate to high intensity exercise in the later stages of pregnancy can lead to smaller,
leaner babies that are still within the normal size range for newborns.
Will exercise be harder during pregnancy?
Your body will go through many changes throughout pregnancy that could affect your ability and tolerance to exercise.
As a pregnancy goes on, the amount of blood in your body and your heart rate increases. This means your body works
harder to give enough nutrients and oxygen to both you and your pregnancy, so there is less oxygen available for
exercise. This change in blood flow could also make you feel lightheaded.
As your pregnancy grows larger, your sense of balance shifts, meaning that you may need to adjust your posture. This
shift in posture can make certain types of exercise (such as running, yoga, and free weights) more challenging. Joints
also become looser due to hormonal changes. Looser joints mean there is a higher chance of strains or sprains during
otherwise routine movements and exercise.
What are the benefits of exercising during pregnancy?
Exercise is important for your physical and mental health. It may improve mood and sleep patterns and might help
prevent or treat gestational diabetes. Exercise may also ease some of the common discomforts of pregnancy such as
constipation, backache, fatigue, leg swelling, and varicose veins.
Exercise
March 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
What are some basic guidelines for exercising during pregnancy?
If your pregnancy is not high risk, and you have checked with your healthcare provider, some basic guidelines to keep
in mind include:
Exercise most days of the week.
During the second and third trimesters, avoid exercise that involves lying flat on your back because this causes
less blood flow for both you and your pregnancy.
Avoid exercising to the point where you are exhausted or out of breath.
Be aware that your sense of balance will change throughout pregnancy, which could lead to falls.
Drink plenty of fluids before and during exercise.
Avoid overheating your body, especially in the first trimester.
What types of exercises are good choices during pregnancy?
Most women can continue their pre-pregnancy exercise routine during pregnancy, but you may need to modify some
activities. Listen to your body and stop when you feel too tired or if you feel dizziness, headaches, muscle weakness,
nausea, chest pain, fewer fetal movements, or have contractions. Do not get discouraged: even mild to moderate
exercise can help your fitness level and mood.
Most women can participate in a wide range of recreational activities. Non-weight bearing exercises such as stationary
cycling, swimming, or water aerobics are easiest on your body throughout your entire pregnancy. Check with your
healthcare provider if you are wondering if you should try a certain type of exercise or activity.
What types of exercise should I try to avoid during pregnancy?
ACOG does not recommend contact sports or activities that can increase the risk of injury or falls during pregnancy.
Contact sports such as ice hockey, soccer, and basketball could result in trauma to both you and your pregnancy. Also,
the chance of falling during activities such as gymnastics, horseback riding, jet skiing, water skiing, surfing, and
downhill skiing may be higher during pregnancy from balance changes. Scuba diving, skydiving, and any exercise at or
above altitudes of 6,000 feet are not recommended since they are all associated with lower oxygen levels. Hot yoga
(also known as Bikram yoga) and hot Pilates are done in rooms typically between 95ºF and 104ºF (35ºC to 40ºC).
These activities are not recommended during pregnancy due to the very high temperatures and lack of information in
pregnancy. Check with your healthcare provider if you are wondering if you should try a certain type of exercise or
activity.
If I am doing intense training, is there anything I should consider while pregnant?
Talk with your healthcare provider about your training and goals. As an athlete, you may need to change your training
program in each stage of pregnancy. While there may be risk involved in physical activity for some women, most
healthcare providers believe that the benefits of being active far outweigh the risks, even for those who wish to
continue participation at an elite level. Your pre-pregnancy levels of fitness, as well as your particular sport, must be
considered when planning how intensely, how long, and how often you exercise. When done under the care and
guidance of your healthcare provider, it is unlikely that your exercise program or sport will cause problems.
Studies have found that some athletes use supplementation to enhance performance. However, information on the use
of supplements in pregnancy is often very limited. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider if you are thinking about
taking any supplements while pregnant or breastfeeding. MotherToBaby has a fact sheet on herbal products at:
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
When can I begin to exercise after giving birth?
Talk to your healthcare provider to find out how soon you can begin to exercise after giving birth. Your body will
continue to go through changes from your pregnancy for many weeks after your baby is born. How long you should
wait will depend on a few factors, including how active you were able to be during pregnancy, any health problems you
have, and what type of delivery you had.
Exercise
March 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
Breastfeeding while exercising:
When done in moderation and under the guidance of your healthcare provider, exercise is not expected to affect
breastfeeding. Most women will make the same amount of milk whether they exercise or not. However, it is very
important to drink a lot of water when breastfeeding, especially if you are exercising. Be sure to talk to your healthcare
provider about all of your breastfeeding questions.
If a man exercises, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Exercise is not expected to affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). Studies have not been done to
see if exercise could increase the chance of birth defects in a partner’s pregnancy. In general, exposures that men
have are unlikely to increase the risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet
Paternal Exposures and Pregnancy at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, March 1, 2024.




X-rays
October 1, 2024
page 1 of 4
X-rays
This sheet is about having X-rays while pregnant or breastfeeding. This information is based on available published
research. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What are X-rays?
X-rays are a form of energy known as ionizing radiation. X-rays have enough energy to pass through the body. As the
X-ray moves through the body, it passes through bones, tissues, and organs differently. This allows an image to be
created of the inside of the body. These images are used to help guide medical treatment.
If you have an X-ray, it will be performed with a standard X-ray machine or with a CT (computed tomography)
machine. X-ray machines and CT machines only make radiation when they are turned on and actively in use. X-rays
will lose energy as they travel through an object. Having X-rays will not make your body radioactive.
This sheet will focus on having diagnostic X-rays taken as a patient. For people who work around X-ray machines,
MotherToBaby has a fact sheet at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/ionizing-radiation-workplace-pregnancy/.
What is radiation?
Radiation is a type of energy. Radiation waves can’t be seen, felt, or smelled. Radiation comes from our natural
environment (called background radiation) and can be made by machines.
Radiation is grouped into 2 categories: 1) non-ionizing radiation and 2) ionizing radiation.
Non-ionizing radiation has lower energy than ionizing radiation. Non-ionizing radiation includes radio waves,
microwaves, and lower-energy ultraviolet (UV) sunlight rays. Common sources of non-ionizing radiation include
light bulbs, computers, Wi-Fi routers, cell phones, Bluetooth devices, FM radio, GPS, airport body scanning units,
and broadcast television.
Ionizing radiation refers to X-rays, gamma rays, and some of the higher ultraviolet (UV) sunlight spectrum. A
small amount of ionizing radiation is used to make X-ray images. Higher doses of ionizing radiation are used to
kill cancer cells with cancer radiation therapy. Gamma radiation has also been used in medical treatments.
Could I be exposed to ionizing radiation if I need to go through airport security body
scanners?
In the United States, airport body scanning units do not use ionizing radiation. These machines use millimeter wave
technology to scan a person’s body. Millimeter-wave technology is non-ionizing radiation in the form of low-level radio
waves. Women who are pregnant or breastfeeding a child can use body scanners at airports.
How is the dose of ionizing radiation measured? For example, what is milli-sievert (mSV) or
milli-rem (mrem)?
Radiation is measured in several different ways. The international unit of measurement for radiation dose is the milli-
sievert (mSv), and in the United States you may also read or hear about “milli-rem”.
1 milli-sievert (mSV) is about the same 100 milli-rem (mrem).
People are surrounded by ionizing radiation every day. Ionizing radiation is in our soil, water, and air. These sources of
radiation are called background radiation. Most people are exposed to about 3 mSv (300 mrem) of background
radiation every year. During pregnancy, a fetus is exposed to around 1 mSV of background radiation (about 100
mrem).
What is the effective dose of ionizing radiation to me from a diagnostic x-ray?
This depends on what part of the body is being X-rayed. The table below shows the average estimated dose after an x-
ray. These doses have not been associated with increased risks to a pregnancy.
X-rays
October 1, 2024
page 2 of 4
X-ray Effective dose in mSv Effective dose in
mrem
Abdomen 0.6 60
Chest 0.1 10
Dental Bitewing 0.005 0.5
Dental Panoramic 0.026 2.6
DEXA (whole body) 0.001 0.1
Mammogram (4 views) 0.7 70
Pelvis / Hip 0.4 40
What is the effective dose of ionizing radiation to my fetus if I had a diagnostic x-ray?
When an X-ray is taken, the actual dose to the embryo/fetus is less than the dose listed in the table above. This is
because some of the X-ray is absorbed by the parent’s body before reaching the inside of the uterus (where the fetus
is developing). For typical diagnostic X-rays on the parent, a fetus is not expected to be exposed to levels that could
cause pregnancy complications.
I had X-rays taken. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
If a woman has had X-rays taken, it is not expected to make it harder for her to get pregnant.
Does having an X-ray increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Having typical diagnostic X-rays
will not increase the chance of miscarriage.
Women with exposure to X-ray doses greater than 50 mSv (5,000 mrem) in the first 2 weeks after conception, which is
the time before the egg implants into the uterus, might have a higher chance for miscarriage This dose is much higher
than the dose from a typical diagnostic X-ray.
Will having X-rays taken increase the chance of birth defects?
Having a typical diagnostic X-ray will not increase the chance of birth defects. Birth defects can happen in any
pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100 (3%) will have a birth defect. We
look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure might increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
X-rays
October 1, 2024
page 3 of 4
X-ray exposure of less than 50 mSv (5,000 mrem) has not been linked with an increased chance of birth defects.
Does having an X-ray increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Typical diagnostic X-ray exposure in pregnancy is not expected to increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces
[2500 grams] at birth). Exposure to high doses (around 250 mSv (25,000 mrem)) of ionizing radiation might increase
the chance of having a baby with small head size or poor growth. It would be rare for a person to have an exposure
that was this high.
Does having an X-ray affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Typical diagnostic X-ray exposure in pregnancy is not expected to increase the chance of learning difficulties or
behavior disorders in the child. Exposure to high doses (more than 500 mSv or more than 50,000 mrem) of ionizing
radiation during a pregnancy could increase the chance of learning difficulties and intellectual disabilities. In addition,
exposure to more than 100 mSV (10,000 mrem) of radiation between the 8th week and the 15th week of pregnancy
might be associated with learning difficulties and intellectual disability. It would be rare for a person to have an
exposure that was this high.
Breastfeeding after having an X-ray:
Exposure to diagnostic X-rays only happens when an X-ray image is being taken and leaves no radiation or
radioactivity in the body or milk. Diagnostic X-rays do not affect the breastmilk at the time of a procedure and would
not be expected to affect milk production. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding
questions.
If a man has an X-ray, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Several studies have not found a connection between diagnostic X-ray exposure and lower fertility (ability to get a
woman pregnant), birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks
to a pregnancy. For general information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Where can I look for more information?
Health Physics Society: Ask the Experts page: https://hps.org/publicinformation/ate/
Health Physics Society: Pregnancy and Radiation page: https://hps.org/publicinformation/ate/cat4.html
Health Physics Society: Radiation Answers page https://www.radiationanswers.org/
Radiology Info.org for patients: https://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/info/safety-xray
Please click here for references.
X-rays
October 1, 2024
page 4 of 4
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, October 1, 2024.





Berberine
May 1, 2025
page 1 of 2
Berberine
This sheet is about exposure to berberine in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is berberine?
Berberine is an ingredient found in many plant species, including goldthread, huang lian, Oregon grape, and barberry.
It has been used to treat many conditions, such as diarrhea, diabetes, and high cholesterol. It has also been used for
weight loss.
Berberine is available as a supplement sold over the counter. In general, it is suggested to speak with your healthcare
provider before taking any supplements. Many supplements are not recommended for use during pregnancy unless
your healthcare provider has prescribed them to treat a medical condition. This is because they are not well-regulated
or studied for use in pregnancy. For more detail on supplements, please see the fact sheet at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
I take berberine. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if berberine can make it harder to get pregnant. There is some information to suggest berberine might
increase fertility and pregnancy rates in people with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Does taking berberine increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. It is not known if berberine can
increase the chance of miscarriage. One study suggests that berberine might cause uterine contractions. As there can
be many causes of miscarriage, it is hard to know if a medication, the medical condition being treated, or other factors
(such as age, health, other exposures) are the cause of a miscarriage.
Does taking berberine increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure like berberine might
increase the chance for birth defects in a pregnancy.
It is not known if using berberine can increase the chance of birth defects. The research on berberine is limited to one
report looking at 218 pregnancies exposed to huang lian (which contains berberine). Of those, three babies had
nervous system defects, and three had defects in their genitals.
Does taking berberine in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Studies have not been done to see if berberine can increase the chance of pregnancy-related problems such as
preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at
birth).
Berberine can change how bilirubin (a yellowish pigment that is made during the breakdown of red blood cells) binds
to serum albumin (the main protein in blood plasma). This can cause a buildup of bilirubin in the brain, which can lead
to brain damage and other issues. While information on this is very limited, one author suggests avoiding herbs and
products that contain berberine during pregnancy.
Does taking berberine in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if berberine can increase the chance of behavior or learning issues for the child.
Breastfeeding while taking berberine:
Berberine can pass into breastmilk, but it is not known how much. It may raise the risk of bilirubin buildup in a baby’s
brain, which can lead to brain damage and other problems, especially in newborns. Also, because berberine is a
supplement, it is not recommended for use during breastfeeding unless your healthcare provider has prescribed it to
Berberine
May 1, 2025
page 2 of 2
treat a medical condition. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes berberine, could it affect his fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Studies have not been done in humans to see if berberine could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a partner pregnant)
or increase the chance of birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to
increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, May 1, 2025.








Herbal Products
April 1, 2025
page 1 of 2
Herbal Products
This sheet is about using herbal products in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What are herbal products?
Herbal products are considered dietary supplements. They are not the same as medication. In the United States,
dietary supplements cannot be sold for the purposes of treating, diagnosing, preventing, or curing disease. They come
in many forms, such as teas, infusions, caplets, dried extracts, and tinctures.
People often forget to tell their healthcare provider(s) that they use herbal products, but it is important to let all your
healthcare providers know about all herbal products, supplements, and other over-the-counter products that you use.
Dangerous side effects have been reported for some herbal products. Herbal products can also affect how prescribed
medications or anesthesia work. Be sure to ask your healthcare provider if the supplement you are considering would
be helpful for you before starting the use of any herbal products.
Herbs can also be used in food preparation. When used in moderation, herbs used in preparing food are not expected
to be of concern.
Are herbal products different from using prescription or over-the-counter medications?
Yes. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates herbal products differently than prescription medications. Very
few herbal products have scientific proof that they work at all or in the way stated on the product label. Also, there are
no standards for ingredients and strength. Be mindful of product claims such as “works better than [a prescription
drug],” “totally safe,” or has “no side effects.” Keep in mind that the term ‘natural’ doesn’t mean a product is free from
harmful effects.
Many herbal supplements have not been evaluated for use in pregnancy or breastfeeding. Herbal products could
contain high amounts of ingredients that can be of concern in pregnancy or while breastfeeding. Some herbal products
might contain contaminants such as metals (lead, arsenic, mercury), pesticides, other chemicals, or microorganisms
(e.g. fungi or bacteria). They might contain other ingredients not listed on the label. Tinctures and liquid products can
contain alcohol. Alcohol should be avoided in pregnancy. Levels of active ingredients in herbal preparations will
depend on the growing and harvesting conditions, plant parts used (e.g. root, stem, flower, and/or bark), and the way
they are made into supplements.
I take herbal products. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Some herbal supplements have been shown to cause changes in hormones that are important for getting pregnant.
Other products have been suggested to increase the chances of getting pregnant.
I just found out that I am pregnant, should I stop using herbal products?
Most herbal products have not been well studied during pregnancy, so it might not be known how they could affect a
pregnancy. A woman who is pregnant or planning a pregnancy should talk with their healthcare providers about their
herbal products and why they are using them. There might be other therapies for which more information on using
during pregnancy is available.
Does taking herbal products increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Some products have been shown
to cause hormone imbalance or uterine contractions that could lead to pregnancy loss.
Does taking herbal products increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like herbal products,
might increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
Herbal Products
April 1, 2025
page 2 of 2
There is limited information on the use of most herbal products during pregnancy. Products that contain more than 1
ingredient are very hard to study for how they could affect a pregnancy. Other concerns with using herbal products
during pregnancy include interactions between herbal products and other medications and possible harmful
substances in herbal products that are not noted on the label.
Does taking herbal products in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Some products have been shown to bring on labor, changes in hormones, or uterine contractions. Read the label on
the product and discuss each ingredient with your healthcare provider.
Does taking herbal products in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
For many herbal products, studies have not been done to see if they can increase the chance of behavior or learning
issues for the child.
Breastfeeding and herbal products:
There is little information on use of herbal products while breastfeeding. Read the label on the product and discuss
each ingredient with your healthcare provider. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding
questions.
If a man takes herbal products, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth
defects?
Some herbal products might affect men’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). Herbal product ingredients should
be looked at carefully before using. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase
risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2025.









Ginger
December 1, 2024
page 1 of 2
Ginger
This sheet is about exposure to ginger in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on published
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is ginger?
Ginger (Zingibar officinale) is a plant that is widely used in foods and beverages. The root (rhizome) is the part of the
plant that is eaten or taken. Eating ginger in moderation as part of a balanced diet is not known to cause any problems
related to pregnancy or breastfeeding.
Ginger is also used as an herbal remedy to treat different conditions, such as morning sickness, motion sickness, upset
stomach, or vomiting. It is available as a supplement sold over the counter, and can come in the form of pills, capsules,
syrups, or included in lozenges or tea.
Talk with your healthcare provider before taking any supplements. It is generally not suggested to use herbal
products/supplements during pregnancy or breastfeeding unless directed by your healthcare provider to treat a
condition. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulates dietary supplements in a different way than
prescription or over-the-counter drugs. For more details on supplements, please see the fact sheet at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
I take ginger. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
It is not known if taking ginger can make it harder to get pregnant.
Does taking ginger increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Ginger has not been found to
increase the chance of miscarriage in humans.
Does taking ginger increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like ginger, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy. Several studies looking at the use of an average of 1000 mg of
ginger per day during pregnancy did not find an increased chance of birth defects.
Does taking ginger in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Information from one study on the use of ginger in the second trimester of pregnancy has not found an increased
chance of preterm delivery (birth before week 37). Other studies have not seen an increase in preterm delivery, low
birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth), or stillbirth.
Ginger can interact with some medications and might affect the way certain medications work, such as medications
that treat blood pressure or affect how your blood clots. At high doses, ginger can lower blood sugar. Taking ginger
supplements with certain medications might be a concern at any time in pregnancy. If you take a medication and
would like to take a ginger supplement, it is important to talk it over with your healthcare provider.
Does taking ginger in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Ginger is not expected to increase the chance of behavior or learning issues for the child.
Breastfeeding while eating ginger or taking a ginger supplement:
When used in moderation as part of a balanced diet, there is no known reason to avoid cooking with and eating ginger
in its natural form during breastfeeding. There is not enough information on the use of ginger as a supplement in
breastfeeding to know if it can increase risks to a breastfeeding child. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about
all your breastfeeding questions.
Ginger
December 1, 2024
page 2 of 2
If a man takes ginger, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Studies have not been done to see if ginger could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) or increase
the chance of birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a
pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here to view references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, December 1, 2024.






Folic Acid | Folate
January 1, 2024
page 1 of 2
Folic Acid | Folate
This sheet is about exposure to folic acid in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information should not take the
place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is folic acid?
Folic acid is available as a nutritional supplement. It is the lab-made form of the vitamin folate (vitamin B9). Folate is
important for making and maintaining healthy cells in the body. The body has an easier time absorbing folic acid than
folate.
Many foods contain folate. These foods include dark leafy greens, asparagus, broccoli, avocado, beans, carrots,
squash, nuts, and citrus fruits. Folic acid is added to some foods to increase their nutritional value. In the United
States, folic acid is added to cereal, wheat flour, corn meal, rice, and many types of bread and pasta. Many other
countries also fortify wheat and maize flour with folic acid.
Taking a folic acid supplement before and during pregnancy can lower the chance of certain types of birth defects.
Folic acid is available over the counter as a supplement and is also often found in prenatal vitamins.
How much folic acid should I be taking?
In general, it has been recommended to take 400 micrograms (mcg), or 0.4 milligrams (mg) of folic acid per day,
whether pregnant or not. For women who are not already taking a daily folic acid supplement, and are planning a
pregnancy, it has been recommended to start taking folic acid at least 1 month before a pregnancy.
During pregnancy, the recommended daily amount of folic acid is 600-800 mcg. Most people can get enough folic acid
by eating foods with folate and by taking a folic acid supplement (as part of a prenatal vitamin or a separate
supplement).
In addition to daily recommended amounts of vitamins, there are also tolerable upper intake levels, abbreviated as
“UL”. The UL is the highest level of daily nutrient intake recommended for most people. The UL for folic acid / folate is
1,000 micrograms (mcg), or 1 milligram (mg) per day.
However, there are situations where women are recommended to take more than 1mg per day prior to and during
pregnancy. This is most important for some women with a family history of a child with a neural tube birth defect (an
opening in the spine or skull). Extra folic acid might also be recommended for some women who take certain
medications, drink large amounts of alcohol, or have diseases of the intestines and cannot absorb as much folic acid
into their body. Talk with your healthcare provider about your medication and health conditions and ask if they might
affect the amount of folic acid in your body. Your providers can go over how much folic acid is right for you.
I take folic acid. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Folic acid is not expected to make it harder to get pregnant. It is recommended to take a daily supplement of folic acid
and at least one month before getting pregnant.
Does taking folic acid increase the chance for miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Folic acid is not expected to
increase the chance for miscarriage. Some studies suggest that folic acid might help to lower the chance of
miscarriage.
Does taking folic acid increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Taking folic
acid before and during pregnancy lowers the chance of a baby having neural tube birth defects (an opening in the
spine or skull). Taking folic acid might also lower the chance of other birth defects.
Folic Acid | Folate
January 1, 2024
page 2 of 2
Does taking folic acid in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Taking folic acid at recommended levels is not expected to cause other pregnancy-related problems, such as preterm
delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth).
Some studies suggest that taking folic acid might lower the chance of some pregnancy complications such as preterm
delivery or getting high blood pressure during pregnancy, and reduce the chance of stillbirth or death in the newborn
period.
Does taking folic acid in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if folic acid can cause behavior or learning issues for the child.
Breastfeeding while taking folic acid:
Folic acid is naturally found in the breast milk of women who are well-nourished. While breastfeeding, it is
recommended to get 500 mcg (0.5 mg) of folic acid every day. Babies get folic acid from breastmilk, so it is important
to get enough folic acid while breastfeeding. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all of your breastfeeding
questions.
If a man takes folic acid, could it affect fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) or
increase the chance of birth defects?
Some studies have suggested that folic acid is needed to make healthy sperm. In one study involving men with
infertility folic acid supplementation increased sperm motility (how well the sperm can move). The recommended
amount of folic acid for men is 400 mcg/day (0.4 mg/day). If there is a concern about how much folic acid a person is
getting, talk with a healthcare provider. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to increase the risks to a
pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, January 1, 2024.









Echinacea
March 1, 2025
page 1 of 2
Echinacea
This sheet is about exposure to echinacea in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published research. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare providers.
What is echinacea?
Echinacea is an herb that comes from the roots, stem, leaves, and flower of the plant Echinacea purpurea (purple
coneflower). Dried roots of Echinacea angustifolia and Echinacea pallida are also used. The type of active
ingredients among different products can vary widely. The active ingredients and strength of the active ingredients
depends on the type of echinacea plant used, the part of the plant used, and how it is made.
Echinacea comes in many forms, such as teas, extracts, capsules, tablets, tinctures, and preparations that go on the
skin (topical). Some dietary supplements can contain echinacea.
Herbal products do not need to show that they are safe or effective before they are sold to the public. The ingredients
and dose on the label may be different from what is in the product. Many herbs and herbal products have not been
studied, or well-studied, for use in human pregnancy. Herbal products may contain harmful substances (called
contaminants) such as metals, pesticides, chemicals, or microorganisms. These contaminants may have their own
negative effects on a pregnancy.
The use of herbal products is generally not recommended during pregnancy unless under the direction and care of
your healthcare provider to treat a medical condition. For more information on herbal products in general, please see
our fact sheet at: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
Tinctures can contain the extract of a plant (such as echinacea) dissolved in alcohol. These preparations could have a
significant amount of alcohol. Alcohol should be avoided during pregnancy and breastfeeding. More information about
alcohol can be found in our fact sheet here https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/alcohol-pregnancy/.
I take echinacea. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Studies have not been done to see if taking echinacea could make it harder to get pregnant.
Does taking echinacea increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Animal studies suggest that
echinacea products might increase the chance of miscarriage. However, it is not clear how the echinacea preparations
and dose levels used in the animal studies compare to what would be used by humans. One small study in humans
found no increased chance of miscarriage in those who took echinacea when compared to those who did not.
Does taking echinacea increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like echinacea, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy. Small studies looking at exposure to echinacea during pregnancy
have not reported an increased chance of birth defects above the background risk.
Does taking echinacea in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
In a study comparing over 350 pregnancies exposed to echinacea and over 68,000 unexposed pregnancies, no
increased chance of preterm delivery (birth before week 37), low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces
[2500 grams] at birth), or small for gestational age infants was reported.
Does taking echinacea in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if echinacea can increase the chance of behavior or learning issues for the child.
Some echinacea preparations have been found to be contaminated by heavy metals like lead. High blood lead levels
Echinacea
March 1, 2025
page 2 of 2
during pregnancy can harm fetal development. More information on lead can be found in our factsheet here
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/lead-pregnancy/,
Breastfeeding while taking echinacea:
Information on the use of echinacea while breastfeeding is limited. One study found some components of echinacea in
breast milk after a breastfeeding mother took echinacea tablets. It is not known if or how these components would
affect a nursing child. If you suspect the baby has any symptoms (stomach upset, diarrhea, constipation, skin rash, or
allergic reactions), contact the child’s healthcare provider. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your
breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes echinacea could it affect his fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Studies have not been done in humans to see if taking echinacea could affect male fertility (ability to get a wonan
pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are
unlikely to increase the risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal
Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, March 1, 2025.











Capsaicin
February 1, 2024
page 1 of 2
Capsaicin
This sheet is about exposure to capsaicin in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is capsaicin?
Capsaicin is the part of peppers (Solanaceae family, capsicum genus) that makes your mouth feel hot. Capsaicin has
been generally recognized as safe (GRAS) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in food and candy. It
has been used in some cosmetics, to treat nausea/vomiting, and is the main ingredient in pepper spray used for
defense.
Capsaicin has been used in topical (applied to the skin) form to treat pain. Some brand names for topical preparations
include Capazasin®, Qutenza®, and Zostrix®. It has also been given as an injection in the foot to help treat pain from
Morton’s neuroma (a nerve condition of the foot).
Capsaicin has been sold in oral forms (such as pills and capsules) as an herbal supplement. The use of herbal products
is generally not recommended during pregnancy unless under the direction and care of your healthcare provider to
treat a medical condition. For more information about herbal products, please see our fact sheet at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
I take capsaicin. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Studies have not been done in humans to see if using capsaicin can make it harder to get pregnant. Animal studies did
not report that capsaicin affected female fertility (ability to get pregnant).
Does taking capsaicin increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Studies have not been done to see
if capsaicin can increase the chance of miscarriage.
Does taking capsaicin increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Studies
have not been done in humans to see if capsaicin can increase the chance of birth defects. Animal studies do not
suggest that capsaicin increases the chance of birth defects.
Does taking capsaicin in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Studies have not been done in humans to see if capsaicin can increase the chance of pregnancy-related problems,
such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500
grams] at birth). One animal study suggested that capsaicin might affect growth of the developing fetus.
Does taking capsaicin in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if capsaicin can increase the chance of behavior or learning issues for the child.
Breastfeeding while taking capsaicin:
Capsaicin has not been studied for use while breastfeeding. There is a report of two breastfed infants who developed
skin rashes when they nursed 12 and 15 hours after the breastfeeding woman ate foods that were flavored with red
pepper. The skin reactions in the nursing infants slowly went away over several days. If you suspect the baby has any
symptoms (such as a rash) contact the child’s healthcare provider. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all
your breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes capsaicin, could it affect his fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Studies have not been done in humans to see if capsaicin could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant)
or increase the chance of birth defects. Animal studies do not suggest that capsaicin could affect male fertility. In
Capsaicin
February 1, 2024
page 2 of 2
general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more
information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, February 1, 2024.











Iodine
April 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Iodine
This sheet is about exposure to iodine in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on research
studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is iodine?
Iodine is a naturally occurring element. It can be found in some foods, supplements, medications, and topical
disinfectants. The body uses iodine to make thyroid hormones. The thyroid gland cannot work properly without the
right amounts of iodine. People who are pregnant or nursing need more iodine than most other people do. The
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for iodine is between 220 micrograms (mcg) and 290 mcg in pregnancy, and
is 290 mcg when breastfeeding.
How do I know if I am getting enough iodine?
An easy way to get iodine in your diet is to use iodized salt when cooking or seasoning foods. You can also take a daily
prenatal vitamin that contains at least 150 mcg of iodine if you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant. Be sure to
check the label on your prenatal vitamins since some do not contain iodine. Potassium iodide is the preferred source of
iodine for prenatal vitamins.
If you have a known thyroid disease or concerns about your thyroid, talk with your healthcare provider before taking
iodine supplements.
Your healthcare provider might test your thyroid hormone levels during pregnancy. People with normal thyroid
hormone levels who are taking supplements containing 150 mcg of iodine daily are expected to have good iodine
levels.
What can cause low levels of iodine in the body?
Low levels of iodine in the body (iodine deficiency) can be caused by not getting enough iodine through foods or
supplements. For people who already have low iodine, eating a diet high in foods that reduce iodine levels, such as
cassava or cabbage, can lower their iodine even more.
Does having low iodine levels make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Not having enough iodine in the body can cause low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism). People with low levels
of thyroid hormone can have a harder time getting pregnant.
Does having low iodine levels increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Low levels of iodine in the body
can cause low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism). People with low levels of thyroid hormone during pregnancy
have an increased chance of miscarriage.
Does having low iodine levels increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure or condition, like low
iodine levels (iodine deficiency) might increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
Having low levels of iodine during pregnancy is not expected to increase the chance of birth defects above the
background risk.
Would having low iodine levels increase the chance of other pregnancy related problems?
Low levels of iodine in the body can cause low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism). Low levels of thyroid
hormone during pregnancy might lead to poor growth of the baby and increase the chance of preterm delivery (birth
before week 37). Some studies suggest that severe iodine deficiency (very low levels of iodine) could increase the
chance of stillbirth or of infant death around the time of delivery. Severe iodine deficiency during pregnancy can
increase the chance of hearing problems in the child. However, it is very rare for people in developed countries (such
Iodine
April 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
as the United States) to have severe iodine deficiency.
Does having low iodine levels affect future behavior or learning for the child?
It is possible that mild iodine deficiency during pregnancy could lead to problems with learning and behavior, but this
has not been clearly proven in studies. Severe iodine deficiency during pregnancy can increase the chance of serious
learning problems in the child.
What can cause high levels of iodine in the body?
High levels of iodine in the body can be caused by having a thyroid condition, taking a medication that has a high
amount of iodine in it, or applying topical antiseptics that contain iodine to the skin or vagina. It is hard to reach very
high levels of iodine from diet alone unless a person very often eats foods that contain a lot of iodine (such as fish,
seaweed, and dairy products).
Does having high levels of iodine cause pregnancy-related problems?
Very high levels of iodine in the body can cause high levels of thyroid hormone (called hyperthyroidism).
Hyperthyroidism can lead to medical problems for both the person who is pregnant and the fetus. The fetus could
develop low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism), or their thyroid gland could grow too large (called a goiter).
Some goiters can cause breathing or swallowing problems in newborns.
Breastfeeding and iodine:
Babies receive all their iodine (for making their own thyroid hormone) from their diet, including breast milk. The
amount of iodine in breast milk depends on the amount of iodine taken in by the person who is breastfeeding. That
means it is important to get enough iodine while breastfeeding a child.
The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for iodine during breastfeeding is 290 mcg daily. Some of this amount will
come from foods. People who follow vegan or vegetarian diets might get less iodine from foods they eat. The American
Thyroid Association recommends that anyone who is breastfeeding a child should continue to take a daily supplement
that contains 150 mcg of iodine to help them reach the recommended intake. Talk with your healthcare provider and
your baby’s pediatrician about how much iodine is right for you and your baby.
It is not recommended to get more than 500 mcg to 1100 mcg of iodine per day for long periods of time while
breastfeeding. If a baby gets too much iodine in the breast milk, it can cause problems with their thyroid gland. Be
sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has high or low iodine levels, can it affect his fertility or increase the chance of
birth defects?
One small study in men reported that those who had high iodine levels also had some changes in their sperm. It is not
clear if the changes were due to the iodine levels or other factors. It is also not clear if the changes had long-term
effects on their fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). Studies have not been done to see if high or low iodine
levels in men could increase the chance of birth defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that fathers
or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the
MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Iodine
April 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2025.








Iodine
April 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Iodine
This sheet is about exposure to iodine in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on research
studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is iodine?
Iodine is a naturally occurring element. It can be found in some foods, supplements, medications, and topical
disinfectants. The body uses iodine to make thyroid hormones. The thyroid gland cannot work properly without the
right amounts of iodine. People who are pregnant or nursing need more iodine than most other people do. The
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for iodine is between 220 micrograms (mcg) and 290 mcg in pregnancy, and
is 290 mcg when breastfeeding.
How do I know if I am getting enough iodine?
An easy way to get iodine in your diet is to use iodized salt when cooking or seasoning foods. You can also take a daily
prenatal vitamin that contains at least 150 mcg of iodine if you are pregnant or planning to get pregnant. Be sure to
check the label on your prenatal vitamins since some do not contain iodine. Potassium iodide is the preferred source of
iodine for prenatal vitamins.
If you have a known thyroid disease or concerns about your thyroid, talk with your healthcare provider before taking
iodine supplements.
Your healthcare provider might test your thyroid hormone levels during pregnancy. People with normal thyroid
hormone levels who are taking supplements containing 150 mcg of iodine daily are expected to have good iodine
levels.
What can cause low levels of iodine in the body?
Low levels of iodine in the body (iodine deficiency) can be caused by not getting enough iodine through foods or
supplements. For people who already have low iodine, eating a diet high in foods that reduce iodine levels, such as
cassava or cabbage, can lower their iodine even more.
Does having low iodine levels make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Not having enough iodine in the body can cause low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism). People with low levels
of thyroid hormone can have a harder time getting pregnant.
Does having low iodine levels increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Low levels of iodine in the body
can cause low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism). People with low levels of thyroid hormone during pregnancy
have an increased chance of miscarriage.
Does having low iodine levels increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure or condition, like low
iodine levels (iodine deficiency) might increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
Having low levels of iodine during pregnancy is not expected to increase the chance of birth defects above the
background risk.
Would having low iodine levels increase the chance of other pregnancy related problems?
Low levels of iodine in the body can cause low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism). Low levels of thyroid
hormone during pregnancy might lead to poor growth of the baby and increase the chance of preterm delivery (birth
before week 37). Some studies suggest that severe iodine deficiency (very low levels of iodine) could increase the
chance of stillbirth or of infant death around the time of delivery. Severe iodine deficiency during pregnancy can
increase the chance of hearing problems in the child. However, it is very rare for people in developed countries (such
Iodine
April 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
as the United States) to have severe iodine deficiency.
Does having low iodine levels affect future behavior or learning for the child?
It is possible that mild iodine deficiency during pregnancy could lead to problems with learning and behavior, but this
has not been clearly proven in studies. Severe iodine deficiency during pregnancy can increase the chance of serious
learning problems in the child.
What can cause high levels of iodine in the body?
High levels of iodine in the body can be caused by having a thyroid condition, taking a medication that has a high
amount of iodine in it, or applying topical antiseptics that contain iodine to the skin or vagina. It is hard to reach very
high levels of iodine from diet alone unless a person very often eats foods that contain a lot of iodine (such as fish,
seaweed, and dairy products).
Does having high levels of iodine cause pregnancy-related problems?
Very high levels of iodine in the body can cause high levels of thyroid hormone (called hyperthyroidism).
Hyperthyroidism can lead to medical problems for both the person who is pregnant and the fetus. The fetus could
develop low levels of thyroid hormone (hypothyroidism), or their thyroid gland could grow too large (called a goiter).
Some goiters can cause breathing or swallowing problems in newborns.
Breastfeeding and iodine:
Babies receive all their iodine (for making their own thyroid hormone) from their diet, including breast milk. The
amount of iodine in breast milk depends on the amount of iodine taken in by the person who is breastfeeding. That
means it is important to get enough iodine while breastfeeding a child.
The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for iodine during breastfeeding is 290 mcg daily. Some of this amount will
come from foods. People who follow vegan or vegetarian diets might get less iodine from foods they eat. The American
Thyroid Association recommends that anyone who is breastfeeding a child should continue to take a daily supplement
that contains 150 mcg of iodine to help them reach the recommended intake. Talk with your healthcare provider and
your baby’s pediatrician about how much iodine is right for you and your baby.
It is not recommended to get more than 500 mcg to 1100 mcg of iodine per day for long periods of time while
breastfeeding. If a baby gets too much iodine in the breast milk, it can cause problems with their thyroid gland. Be
sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man has high or low iodine levels, can it affect his fertility or increase the chance of
birth defects?
One small study in men reported that those who had high iodine levels also had some changes in their sperm. It is not
clear if the changes were due to the iodine levels or other factors. It is also not clear if the changes had long-term
effects on their fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). Studies have not been done to see if high or low iodine
levels in men could increase the chance of birth defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that fathers
or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the
MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Iodine
April 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2025.










Melatonin
April 1, 2024
page 1 of 2
Melatonin
This sheet is about exposure to melatonin in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is melatonin?
Melatonin is a hormone made by the body that helps with the natural sleep-wake cycle (called circadian rhythm).
Melatonin is made by the body mostly during periods of darkness in the night. During pregnancy, the body typically
makes more melatonin. Studies suggest that melatonin levels are highest in the third trimester of pregnancy and
levels are expected to return to normal after delivery.
Melatonin is also available as a supplement sold over the counter. Taking melatonin supplements during pregnancy
has not been well studied. In general, it is suggested to speak with your healthcare provider before taking any
supplements. Many supplements are not recommended for use during pregnancy unless your healthcare provider has
prescribed them to treat a medical condition. This is because they are not well-regulated nor studied for use in
pregnancy. For more detail on supplements, please see the fact sheet at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
I take melatonin. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
A small number of limited studies that have looked at use of melatonin among women with infertility who were
undergoing in vitro-fertilization (IVF) treatments have not shown an increase in pregnancy rates.
Does taking melatonin increase the chance of miscarriage?
This has not been well studied. Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons.
Studies that have looked at melatonin use for infertility have not shown any increases in the chance of miscarriage.
Does taking melatonin increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. It is not
known if taking melatonin would increase the chance of birth defects. The few studies that have been done in humans
with the use of melatonin for the treatments of some conditions in pregnancy (to reduce blood loss during C-section
and improve success of in vitro fertilization) have not suggested an increased chance of birth defects.
Does taking melatonin in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Studies have not been done to see if taking melatonin supplements can increase the chance of other pregnancy-
related problems, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8
ounces [2500 grams] at birth). Studies exploring the use of melatonin to reduce blood loss during C-section deliveries
found mixed results with 3 studies showing less blood loss and 1 study showing no difference in blood loss.
Does taking melatonin in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if taking melatonin supplements can cause behavior or learning issues for the child.
Breastfeeding while taking melatonin:
Melatonin made by the body is present in breastmilk in higher amounts at night. Taking melatonin supplements while
breastfeeding has not been well studied. One case has been reported of an infant with a bleeding problem while being
breastfed by an woman who was taking a supplement that had melatonin and valerian. This bleeding problem has not
been reported in other studies, including studies where melatonin was given directly to infants. Be sure to talk to your
healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes melatonin, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Based on the studies reviewed, it is not known if melatonin supplements could affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a
woman pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that men
Melatonin
April 1, 2024
page 2 of 2
have are unlikely to increase the risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet
Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here to view references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, April 1, 2024.








Vitamin B12
August 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Vitamin B12
This sheet is about exposure to vitamin B12 in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on
published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is vitamin B12?
Vitamin B12 is an essential vitamin that is used by the body to keep your nerve and blood cells healthy and to help
make DNA (genetic material created in your body). Essential vitamins are nutrients that the body cannot make, so
people need to get them from other sources. Vitamin B12 can be found in animal products including meat, seafood,
eggs, and dairy products. Cereals and nutritional yeast have vitamin B12 added to them. Vitamin B12 is also available
as a dietary supplement, or as a prescription medication in the form of an injection (shot) or nasal spray. Vitamin B12
has also been called cobalamin.
Vitamin B12 deficiency (not having enough vitamin B12 in the body) can cause fatigue (feeling very tired), muscle
weakness, pale or ashy skin, a racing heart, loss of appetite, weight loss, and numbness or tingling in the hands and
feet. Not all people with a vitamin B12 deficiency will have symptoms. Sometimes, other health conditions or taking
medications that interact with how vitamin B12 is absorbed can increase the chance of having symptoms.
If your healthcare provider has recommended taking vitamin B12, talk with them before making changes to how you
take this supplement Your healthcare providers can talk with you about the benefits of maintaining your nutrient levels
and the risks of low vitamin B12 during pregnancy.
Talk with your healthcare providers about all of the supplements and vitamins that you take. Have the bottles or
photos of the labels with you so that all reported ingredients and their amounts can be reviewed.
How much vitamin B12 is needed in pregnancy?
The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) is the average daily level of intake that is enough to meet the nutrient
needs for most people. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the dose that people can start to have side effects. It is
not recommended to take more than the RDA of vitamin B12 unless you are doing so under the care of your healthcare
provider to treat a condition. There is currently no UL for vitamin B12, because vitamin B12 is not stored in the body in
excess (extra) amounts. The RDA for females who are pregnant is 2.6 mcg of vitamin B12 a day.
Most people get enough vitamin B12 from their diet. When adding up how much vitamin B12 you are getting,
remember to count amounts from foods, drinks, and from any supplements you are taking. There are resources
available online that list amounts of vitamin B12 typically found in foods, such as the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) National Nutrient Database, found here:
https://www.nal.usda.gov/sites/default/files/page-files/Vitamin%20B-12.pdf. Diet, medications, and certain medical
conditions can cause someone to have low levels of vitamin B12. Some people might need to take a vitamin B12
supplement. Be sure to talk with your healthcare providers about your specific nutritional needs before, during, and
after pregnancy.
Can vitamin B12 make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Taking vitamin B12 at the RDA is not expected to make it harder to get pregnant. It is not known if having a vitamin
B12 deficiency can make it harder to get pregnant.
Does vitamin B12 increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Taking vitamin B12 at the RDA is
not expected to increase the chance of miscarriage. Some studies reported that having low levels of vitamin B12 (less
than 200-300 pg/mL in blood) was associated with an increased chance of miscarriage. Some of these studies
combined multiple factors together, including other vitamins. As there can be many causes of miscarriage, it is hard to
know if vitamin levels, health conditions, or other factors are the cause of a miscarriage.
Does vitamin B12 increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
Vitamin B12
August 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like vitamin B12, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy. Taking vitamin B12 at the RDA is not expected to increase the
chance of birth defects.
It is not known if having too little vitamin B12 can increase the chance of birth defects. Some studies report that
having too little vitamin B12, or having lower metabolism (the body’s processing) of vitamin B12 can increase the
chance of neural tube defects (an opening in the spine or skull). Other studies have not reported the same results. Two
studies have reported an increased chance of cleft lip and/or palate (an opening in the upper lip or the roof of the
mouth) in babies born to women who were deficient in B12 during pregnancy.
Does vitamin B12 increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Taking vitamin B12 at the RDA is not expected to increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems such as
preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at
birth).
Having a vitamin B12 deficiency (B12 levels below 148mol/L) or low vitamin B12 has been associated with preterm
delivery. One study did not report an association between low or deficient vitamin B12 levels and birth weight.
Does vitamin B12 affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Taking vitamin B12 at the RDA is not expected to affect future behavior or learning for the child. It is not known if
having a vitamin B deficiency can affect future behavior or learning for the child.
Breastfeeding and vitamin B12:
Vitamin B12 is a typical part of breast milk. If you are breastfeeding, continue to get the daily recommended daily
allowance of vitamin B12 unless otherwise directed by a healthcare provider. The RDA for females who are
breastfeeding is 2.8 mcg of vitamin B12 a day.
If a person who is breastfeeding is deficient in vitamin B12, the child may have an increased chance of having vitamin
B12 deficiency if they are exclusively breastfed. Infants who are vitamin B12 deficient might experience low muscle
tone, uncontrolled movements (tremors), anemia, and changes in skin and hair development.
Getting enough vitamin B12 while breastfeeding can help a child get enough vitamin B12. See the chart above to find
the RDA for vitamin B12 for women who are breastfeeding. Also, talk to your healthcare provider and your baby’s
pediatrician about your specific nutritional needs before, during, and after breastfeeding. Be sure to talk to your
healthcare provider about all your breastfeeding questions.
Does vitamin B12 affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Taking vitamin B12 at the RDA is not expected to affect men’s fertility (ability to get a partner pregnant) or increase
the chance of birth defects. Studies have not been done in humans to see if a vitamin B12 deficiency could affect
men’s fertility or increase the chance of birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are
unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal
Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Vitamin B12
August 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, August 1, 2025.





Vitamin C
November 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Vitamin C
This sheet is about exposure to vitamin C in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare providers.
What is vitamin C?
Vitamin C is also known as ascorbic acid and dehydroascorbic acid. It is an essential vitamin. Essential vitamins are
nutrients that the body cannot make, so people need to get vitamin C from other sources. Vitamin C is naturally found
in some foods such as fruits and vegetables. Vitamin C is also available as a dietary supplement.
What is the Dietary Reference Intake of vitamin C for women who are pregnant?
The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) is the amount people should aim to get each day. It is not recommended
to take more than the RDA in a day. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the dose that people can start to have
side effects.
Recommended Daily Allowance
(RDA) Upper Limit (UL)
Pregnant and 14 to 18 years
old 80 mg per day 2,000 mg per day
Pregnant and 19 years old or
older 85 mg per day 2,000 mg per day
When looking at daily intake, remember to count amounts from foods, drinks, and from supplements. There are
resources available online that list amounts of vitamin C typically found in foods. Labels on supplements will list the
amount of vitamin C in the product.
Most people can get enough vitamin C from a balanced diet. It is unlikely that you will get too much vitamin C if your
only source of vitamin C is in your food and drink.
People who have exposure to cigarette smoke or who have medical conditions that might affect how their body
absorbs vitamins (such as cancer, eating disorders, kidney disease, malabsorption, or substance misuse) should talk
with their healthcare providers about their specific nutritional needs.
I take vitamin C. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Vitamin C has not been well studied to see if it can make it harder to get pregnant. However, if a woman is getting
recommended amounts of vitamin C (not too much and not too little) it would be unlikely to make it harder to get
pregnant. Two studies have suggested that vitamin C intake might help to lower the chance of infertility (inability to
get pregnant).
Vitamin C
November 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
I just found out I am pregnant. Should I stop taking vitamin C?
It is not recommended to take more than the RDA of vitamins unless you are doing so under the care of your
healthcare provider. Talk with your healthcare providers about all supplements/vitamins that you take. Have the
bottles or photos of the labels with you so that all ingredients and their recommended daily levels can be reviewed.
Products that contain herbal supplements are typically not recommended during pregnancy. For more information on
herbal products please see our fact sheet at: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
Does taking vitamin C increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. While vitamin C supplements and
miscarriage have not been well studied, if a woman is getting the recommended amounts of vitamin C (not too much
and not too little) it would be unlikely that vitamin C would increase the chance for miscarriage. Studies where vitamin
C was given to women who were pregnant prior to 20 weeks in an effort to reduce miscarriage or other pregnancy
complications; no reduction in miscarriage was found.
Does taking vitamin C increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like too much or too little
vitamin C intake, might increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy.
Vitamin C intake below the RDA or at doses higher than the UL is not known to increase the chance for birth defects.
However, vitamin C has not been well studied in relation to birth defects. It is recommended that people take the RDA
of vitamin C unless their healthcare provider prescribes something different.
Does taking vitamin C in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Several studies looked at the use of vitamin C supplementation in the second and third trimester of pregnancy to try to
lower the chance of pregnancy-related complications such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37), low birth weight
(weighing less than 5 pounds 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth), and preeclampsia (high blood pressure and problems
with organs, such as the kidneys), which can lead to seizures (called eclampsia). These studies did not consistently
find benefit or harm to the baby from this supplementation. There is a report of 2 babies exposed to levels higher than
the RDA (more than 400mg per day during pregnancy). After delivery, these 2 babies had rapid metabolism of vitamin
C and then showed signs of vitamin C deficiency.
Does taking vitamin C in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if vitamin C intake below the RDA or at doses higher than the UL can increase the
chance of behavior or learning issues for the child.
Breastfeeding while taking vitamin C:
Vitamin C is a normal part of breastmilk. Women who are breastfeeding should continue to get the daily recommended
amount of vitamin C. The RDA for breastfeeding is different from pregnancy.
Recommended Daily
Allowance (RDA) Upper Limit (UL)
Breastfeeding and 14 to 18
years old 115 mg per day 2,000 mg per day
Vitamin C
November 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
Breastfeeding and 19 years old
or older 120 mg per day 2,000 mg per day
People who have exposure to cigarette smoke or who have medical conditions that might affect how their body
absorbs vitamins (such as cancer, eating disorders, kidney disease, malabsorption, or substance misuse) should talk
with their healthcare providers about their specific nutritional needs. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about
all of your breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes vitamin C, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
A few studies have found that vitamin C might help to improve fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) for some men
but not for others. Men who are experiencing infertility should discuss treatment options with their healthcare
providers. In general, exposures that men have are unlikely to increase the risks to a pregnancy. For more information,
please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, November 1, 2024.











Vitamin D
August 1, 2024
page 1 of 4
Vitamin D
This sheet is about exposure to vitamin D in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is vitamin D?
Vitamin D is a nutrient used by the body to grow and to help absorb calcium, which keeps a person’s bones strong.
Most people’s bodies can make vitamin D with exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays from sunlight. Vitamin D is also found
in some foods, such as fatty fish (salmon, trout, tuna, and mackerel), egg yolks, cheese, and some milks. Vitamin D is
also available as a dietary supplement. Vitamin D deficiency (not having enough vitamin D) can increase the chance of
certain health issues. For example, vitamin D deficiency is the most common cause of rickets, a bone disease that
causes softening and weakening of the bones.
There are several forms of vitamin D. There are two major forms: vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) and vitamin D3
(cholecalciferol). Vitamin D2 is mostly human-made and is added to foods. Vitamin D3 is made in a person’s body and is
found in animal products. Both vitamin D2 and D3 can be found in supplements or fortified foods.
The Endocrine Society recommends that women who are pregnant get vitamin D through foods, prenatal vitamins, or
other supplements. Talk with your healthcare providers about all supplements/vitamins that you take. Have the bottles
or photos of the labels with you so that all ingredients and their recommended daily levels can be reviewed. Products
that contain herbal supplements are typically not recommended during pregnancy. For more information on herbal
products please see our fact sheet at: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
How much vitamin D is needed by women who are pregnant?
The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) is the amount of nutrients people should aim to get each day. The
Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the highest level of daily nutrient intake that is not expected to increase health
risks for most people in the general population.
Recommended daily allowance
(RDA)
Upper limit (UL)
Pregnant and age 14 to
18 years old
15 mcg / 600 IU 100 mcg / 4,000 IU
Pregnant and age 19
years or older 15 mcg / 600 IU 100 mcg / 4,000 IU
It is not recommended to take more than the RDA in a day unless it has been prescribed by your healthcare provider.
When looking at daily intake, remember to count amounts from foods, drinks, and from supplements. There are
resources available online that list amounts of vitamin D typically found in foods, such as the USDA National Nutrient
Database for Vitamin D here: https://ods.od.nih.gov/pubs/usdandb/VitaminD-Food.pdf. Labels on supplements will list
the amount of vitamin D in the product. Be sure to talk with your healthcare providers about your specific nutritional
Vitamin D
August 1, 2024
page 2 of 4
needs before, during, and after pregnancy.
I take vitamin D. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Taking vitamin D at the RDA and staying below the UL is not expected to make it harder to get pregnant. In 1 study,
taking vitamin D up to the daily UL was associated with an increased chance to get pregnant among women who have
experienced infertility (inability to get pregnant after 1 year of trying).
It is not known if taking more than the UL of vitamin D can make it harder to get pregnant. Low levels of vitamin D
have been associated with an increased chance of infertility.
Does taking vitamin D increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. There is mixed information about
low levels of vitamin D (blood levels of vitamin D below 50 nmol/L) and a possible increased chance of miscarriage. In
1 study of over 1,600 women that looked at low levels of vitamin D during pregnancy, an increased chance of
miscarriage was reported. However, another study among 5,000 women did not find an increased chance of
miscarriage with low levels of vitamin D during pregnancy. Another study found that women who had multiple
miscarriages had lower blood concentrations of vitamin D compared to those who had not had multiple miscarriages.
Because there can be many causes of miscarriage, it is hard to know if a supplement, an underlying medical condition,
or other factors are the cause of a miscarriage.
Does taking vitamin D increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. It is not known if high or low levels of vitamin D might affect the chance of birth defects.
In 27 case reports of infants exposed to high levels of vitamin D (blood levels of vitamin D above 125 nmol/L) during
pregnancy, there was no reported increase in the chance of birth defects.
Data from two studies with 192 women suggest a link between neural tube defects (birth defects where the spinal cord
or brain did not form correctly) and low levels of vitamin D. This is not enough data to know if low levels of vitamin D
increase the chance of birth defects.
Does taking vitamin D in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
Limited information suggests taking vitamin D within the RDA is not expected to increase the chance of pregnancy-
related problems, such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8
ounces [2500 grams] at birth).
High levels of vitamin D (blood levels of vitamin D above 125 nmol/L) have not been linked to an increased chance of
pregnancy-related problems. There are case reports of an infant having hypercalcemia (high levels of calcium) after
being exposed to high levels of vitamin D during pregnancy. However, no increase in hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria
(high levels of calcium in the urine) was reported in a clinical trial of vitamin D supplementation of 2000 IU vs 4000 IU
during pregnancy.
Having low levels of vitamin D in pregnancy might increase the chance of low birth weight, low infant calcium levels
(hypocalcemia), or preeclampsia (high blood pressure and problems with organs, such as the kidneys), which can lead
to seizures (called eclampsia). Low levels of vitamin D have been associated with preterm birth with non-white but not
white women who are pregnant.
Does taking vitamin D in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
No behavioral or learning differences were reported in 27 case reports of children exposed to high levels of vitamin D
(blood levels of vitamin D above 125 nmol/L) during pregnancy,
Some studies have suggested that low levels of vitamin D in pregnancy might increase the chance for the child to have
attention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD), lower language skills, or autism spectrum disorder. However, many
factors are involved when a person develops one or more of these conditions. That makes it hard to study these
outcomes and most of these studies did not look at other factors such as underlying medical conditions, family history,
medications used, or other exposures. Overall, there is not enough evidence to say that low levels of vitamin D in
Vitamin D
August 1, 2024
page 3 of 4
pregnancy increase the chance of ADHD, lower language skills, or autism spectrum disorder.
Breastfeeding while taking vitamin D:
Vitamin D is a normal part of breast milk. Women who are breastfeeding should continue to get the daily
recommended amount of vitamin D unless otherwise directed by their healthcare provider. The RDA for breastfeeding
is the same as for pregnancy.
Recommended daily allowance
(RDA)
Upper limit (UL)
Breastfeeding and age
14 to 18 years old
15 mcg / 600 IU 100 mcg /4000 IU
Breastfeeding and age
19 years or older
15 mcg/ 600 IU 100 mcg /4000 IU
Women who are breastfeeding should talk to their healthcare provider and their child’s pediatrician about their specific
nutritional needs before, during, and after breastfeeding. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your
breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes vitamin D, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
In one study, men with low levels of vitamin D (blood levels of vitamin D below 50 nmol/L) had lower sperm motility
(movement of sperm) than men with sufficient levels of vitamin D. This could affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a
woman pregnant). Studies in humans have not been done to see if vitamin D levels increase the chance of birth
defects above the background risk. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase
risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Vitamin D
August 1, 2024
page 4 of 4
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, August 1, 2024.











Vitamin E
September 1, 2024
page 1 of 3
Vitamin E
This sheet is about exposure to vitamin E in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on available
published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is vitamin E?
Vitamin E is an essential vitamin that is used by the body as an antioxidant (protects cells from damage) and helps the
immune system fight infections. Essential vitamins are nutrients that the body cannot make, so people need to get
them from other sources. Vitamin E can be found in foods such as seeds, nuts, vegetable oils, leafy vegetables, and
cereals that have had vitamin E added to them. Vitamin E is also available as a dietary supplement. Vitamin E
deficiency (not having enough vitamin E in the body) can cause problems with the muscles, nerves, and immune
system.
If you have been prescribed vitamin E by your healthcare providers, talk with them before making changes to how you
take your supplement. Your healthcare providers can talk with you about the benefits of maintaining your nutrient
levels and the risks of low nutrients during pregnancy. It is not recommended to take more than the recommended
dietary allowance (RDA) of vitamin E unless you are doing so under the care of your healthcare provider.
Talk with your healthcare providers about all supplements/vitamins that you take. Have the bottles or photos of the
labels with you so that all ingredients and amounts can be reviewed. Herbal supplements are typically not
recommended for use during pregnancy. For more information on herbal products please see our fact sheet at:
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
How much vitamin E is needed by women who are pregnant?
The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) is the amount people should aim to get each day. The Tolerable Upper
Intake Level (UL) is the highest level of daily nutrient intake that is not expected to increase health risks for most
people in the general population.
Recommended daily allowance
(RDA)
Upper limit (UL)
Pregnant and age 14 to
18 years old 15mg 800mg
Pregnant and age 19
years or older 15mg 1000mg
Breastfeeding and age
14 to 18 years old 19mg 800mg
Vitamin E
September 1, 2024
page 2 of 3
Breastfeeding and age
19 years or older 19mg 1000mg
It is not recommended to take more than the RDA in a day unless it has been prescribed by your healthcare provider.
When looking at daily intake, remember to count amounts from foods, drinks, and from supplements. There are
resources available online that list amounts of vitamin E typically found in foods, such as the United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA) National Nutrient Database, found here: https://ods.od.nih.gov/pubs/usdandb/VitaminE-Food.pdf.
Labels on supplements will list the amount of vitamin E in the product. Be sure to talk with your healthcare providers
about your specific nutritional needs before, during, and after pregnancy.
I take vitamin E. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Taking vitamin E at the RDA and staying below the UL is not expected to make it harder to get pregnant.
Does taking vitamin E increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. There are no studies that suggest
that taking more than the RDA, but less than the UL, of vitamin E or having too little vitamin E can increase the chance
of miscarriage. Studies have not been done to see if taking more than the UL of vitamin E can increase the chance of
miscarriage.
Does taking vitamin E increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. Taking vitamin E at the RDA and staying below the UL is not expected to increase the
chance of birth defects.
One study reported an increased chance of heart defects when women took between 14.9 and 33.8 mg daily during
pregnancy (more than the RDA but less than the UL). Another study reported an increased chance of heart defects
when the woman who was pregnant did not get the RDA of vitamin E. This is not enough information to draw
conclusions from these reports. There is no proven relationship between the amount of vitamin E taken and an
increased chance of birth defects.
Does taking vitamin E in pregnancy increase the chance of other pregnancy-related
problems?
It is not known if taking too much or too little vitamin E can cause other pregnancy-related problems, such as preterm
delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth). One
study reported that mothers with blood concentration of vitamin E in the high end of the of the normal range had
newborns who were large for gestational age (LGA) (weighing more than most other newborns) compared to mothers
who had lower vitamin E levels that were still within the normal range. One study is not enough to make a conclusion
about vitamin E having an effect on a newborn’s size.
Does taking vitamin E in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Taking vitamin E at the RDA and staying below the UL is not expected to affect future behavior or learning for the
child. Studies in humans have not been done to see if too much or too little vitamin E increases the chance for
behavior or learning issues.
Breastfeeding while taking vitamin E:
Vitamin E is a normal part of breast milk. Women who are breastfeeding should continue to get the daily
recommended amount of vitamin E unless otherwise directed by their healthcare provider. The RDA for breastfeeding
is higher than for pregnancy. Refer to the chart above for the RDA and UL while breastfeeding.
Women who are breastfeeding should talk to their healthcare provider and their child’s pediatrician about their
Vitamin E
September 1, 2024
page 3 of 3
nutritional needs before, during, and after breastfeeding. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your
breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes vitamin E, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
It is not known if too much vitamin E in could affect a man’s fertility (ability to get a woman pregnant) or increase the
chance of birth defects. Men with vitamin E deficiency (blood levels of vitamin E less than 4 mg/L) might make less
sperm, which could affect the ability to get a woman pregnant. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors
have are unlikely to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet
Paternal Exposures at https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, September 1, 2024.





Vitamin K
February 1, 2025
page 1 of 3
Vitamin K
This sheet is about exposure to vitamin K in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This information is based on published
research studies. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from your healthcare provider.
What is vitamin K?
Vitamin K is an essential vitamin that is used by the body to help the blood clot (stick together) properly. Essential
vitamins are nutrients that the body cannot make, so people need to get them from other sources. Vitamin K can be
found in foods such as green leafy vegetables, vegetable oils, and some fruits. Vitamin K is also available as a dietary
supplement or an injection (shot).
Vitamin K deficiency (very low levels of vitamin K in the body) can cause symptoms, such as bleeding more than usual
or bruising easily. Not all people with a vitamin K deficiency will have symptoms. Sometimes, other health conditions
or taking medications that interact with how vitamin K is absorbed can increase the chance of having serious
symptoms.
Vitamin K comes in 7 forms, known as vitamins K1, K2, K3, K4, K5, K6, and K7. Vitamins K1 and K2 are natural forms of
vitamin K. Vitamins K3, K4, K5, K6, and K7 are synthetic (lab-made) forms of vitamin K. Vitamin K3 (also called
menadione) is no longer used in dietary supplements or fortified foods. The information in this sheet will apply to forms
of vitamin K that are found in dietary supplements, fortified foods, or naturally occurring in other foods (all forms
except for vitamin K3).
If you have been prescribed vitamin K by your healthcare providers, talk with them before making changes to how you
take this supplement. Your healthcare providers can talk with you about the benefits of maintaining your nutrient
levels and the risks of low vitamin K during pregnancy.
Talk with your healthcare providers about all supplements/vitamins that you take. Have the bottles or photos of the
labels with you so that all reported ingredients and their amounts can be reviewed.
How much vitamin K is needed in pregnancy?
The Adequate Intake (AI) is the amount of vitamin K that people should aim to get each day. There have been no side
effects reported in the general population with intake of vitamin K above the adequate intake level.
Adequate Intake (AI)
Pregnant and age 14 to 18 years old 75 mcg / day
Pregnant and age 19 years or older 90 mcg / day
Breastfeeding and age 14 to 18 years old 75 mcg / day
Breastfeeding and age 19 years or older 90 mcg / day
Most people get enough vitamin K from their diet. When adding up how much vitamin K you are getting, remember to
count amounts from foods, drinks, and from any supplements you are taking. There are resources available online that
Vitamin K
February 1, 2025
page 2 of 3
list amounts of vitamin K typically found in foods, such as the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) National
Nutrient Database, found here: https://nal.usda.gov/sites/default/files/page-files/Vitamin%20K.pdf. Factors like diet,
medications, and certain medical conditions can cause someone to have low levels of vitamin K. Some people,
including pregnant women, might need to take a vitamin K supplement. Be sure to talk with your healthcare providers
about your specific nutritional needs before, during, and after pregnancy.
Can vitamin K make it harder for me to get pregnant?
Vitamin K at the adequate intake level is not expected to make it harder to get pregnant. It is not known if having a
vitamin K deficiency can make it harder to get pregnant.
Does vitamin K increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Vitamin K at the adequate intake
level is not expected to increase the chance of miscarriage. Studies have not been done to see if having a vitamin K
deficiency can increase the chance of miscarriage.
Does vitamin K increase the chance of birth defects?
Birth defects can happen in any pregnancy for different reasons. Out of all babies born each year, about 3 out of 100
(3%) will have a birth defect. We look at research studies to try to understand if an exposure, like vitamin K, might
increase the chance of birth defects in a pregnancy. Vitamin K at the adequate intake level is not expected to increase
the chance of birth defects.
In one collection of case reports, 14 infants whose mothers had vitamin K deficiency during pregnancy were reported
to have poor development of the bones in the skull and changes in the way the brain formed. Case reports cannot
provide enough information to know if vitamin K deficiency actually caused these findings. In some of these cases,
vitamin K deficiency was caused by severe nausea and vomiting during pregnancy (called hyperemesis gravidarum).
This makes it hard to know if the vitamin K deficiency or other factors, such as a health condition, caused the reported
issues. For more information on nausea and vomiting of pregnancy, please see our fact sheet here:
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/nausea-vomiting-pregnancy-nvp/.
Does vitamin K increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Vitamin K at the adequate intake level is not expected to increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems
such as preterm delivery (birth before week 37) or low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds, 8 ounces [2500
grams] at birth).
Having a vitamin K deficiency can increase the chance of hemorrhage (blood loss from a broken blood vessel) in the
pregnant woman and intracranial (in the brain) hemorrhage in the fetus.
Does vitamin K affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Vitamin K at the adequate intake level is not expected to affect future behavior or learning for the child.
Studies have not been done to see if having a vitamin K deficiency alone can increase the chance of behavior or
learning issues for the child. Intracranial hemorrhages or issues with the skull or brain due to vitamin K deficiency
could affect future behavior or learning for the child.
Breastfeeding and vitamin K:
Vitamin K is a typical part of breast milk. Breastfeeding women should continue to get the daily recommended
adequate intake of vitamin K unless otherwise directed by a healthcare provider. The adequate intake level for
breastfeeding is the same as pregnancy and can be found in the chart above.
Breastfeeding women should talk to their healthcare provider and their child’s pediatrician about their specific
nutritional needs before, during, and after breastfeeding. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about all your
breastfeeding questions.
If a man takes vitamin K, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
Vitamin K at the adequate intake level is not expected to affect men’s fertility or increase the chance of birth defects.
Studies have not been done to see if a vitamin K deficiency could affect men’s fertility (ability to get a woman
Vitamin K
February 1, 2025
page 3 of 3
pregnant) or increase the chance of birth defects. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely
to increase risks to a pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, February 1, 2025.
















Zinc
September 1, 2023
page 1 of 3
Zinc
This sheet is about exposure to zinc from diet and dietary supplements in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. This
information is based on available published literature. It should not take the place of medical care and advice from
your healthcare provider.
What is zinc?
Zinc is an essential nutrient. This means the body cannot make zinc, so people need to get zinc from other sources.
Zinc is naturally found in some foods such as meats and seafood or fish, and it is available as a dietary supplement.
Zinc has also been added to some cereals and can be found in some prenatal vitamins. Zinc has also been found in
homeopathic products marketed for colds. Denture adhesives may also contain zinc.
Because zinc is an essential nutrient, women who are pregnant will need to continue to get zinc from food, drinks, and
supplements. Talk with your healthcare providers about all supplements/vitamins that you take. Have the bottles or
photos of the labels with you so that all ingredients and their amounts can be reviewed. Products that contain herbals
are typically not recommended during pregnancy. For more information on herbal products please see our fact sheet
at: https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/herbal-products-pregnancy/.
What are the Dietary Reference Intakes of zinc for women who are pregnant?
Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI) help people know how much of each vitamin or mineral they should aim to get each
day. DRIs include the Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) and a Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL). The
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) is the amount people should aim to get each day from food, drinks, and
supplements. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the dose at which people can start to have side effects. RDAs
and ULs are there to help guide us in getting enough of a good thing but also to keep us from getting too much of a
good thing.
Recommended Daily Allowance
(RDA) Upper Limit (UL)
14 to 18 years old and
pregnant 12 mg per day 34 mg per day
19 years old or older and
pregnant 11 mg per day 40 mg per day
Most people can get enough zinc from a balanced diet. It is unlikely that you will get too much zinc if your only source
of zinc is in your food and drink. There are resources available online that list amounts of zinc typically found in foods.
Labels on supplements will list the amount of zinc in the product.
People who do not eat meat or seafood, have had bariatric surgery (such as gastric bypass), have medical conditions
that might affect how their body absorbs nutrients (such as cancer, eating disorders, kidney disease, malabsorption, or
substance misuse), or have exposure to cigarette smoke, should talk with their healthcare providers about their
specific nutritional needs.
Zinc
September 1, 2023
page 2 of 3
I take zinc. Can it make it harder for me to get pregnant?
If a woman is getting recommended amounts of zinc (not too much and not too little) it would be unlikely to make it
harder to get pregnant. It might be harder for a woman to get pregnant if her zinc levels are too low.
Does taking zinc increase the chance of miscarriage?
Miscarriage is common and can occur in any pregnancy for many different reasons. Studies have not been done to see
if zinc intake below the RDA (too little) or at doses higher than the UL (too much) can increase the chance of
miscarriage.
Does taking zinc increase the chance of birth defects?
Every pregnancy starts out with a 3-5% chance of having a birth defect. This is called the background risk. Zinc intake
between the RDA and the UL is not expected to increase the chance for birth defects. Some studies have suggested
that having blood zinc levels that are too high or too low might be linked to a higher chance of spina bifida (opening in
the spine) in the fetus.
Could taking zinc increase the chance of other pregnancy-related problems?
Some studies found that low blood levels of zinc in the woman who is pregnant might increase the chance of
pregnancy-related problems, such as: low birth weight (weighing less than 5 pounds 8 ounces [2500 grams] at birth),
high blood pressure (pregnancy-induced hypertension), preeclampsia (a serious pregnancy-related condition that can
cause symptoms such as high blood pressure or fluid retention), and stillbirth.
There are some studies looking at zinc supplementation (between 20mg to 30mg) in pregnancy among women known
to have low blood zinc levels. These studies were looking to see if zinc supplementation might reduce the chance of
some pregnancy-related problems for women with low levels of zinc. These studies did not consistently find either
benefit or harm to the baby from this supplementation.
Pregnancy-related problems from high zinc levels have not been well studied.
Does taking zinc in pregnancy affect future behavior or learning for the child?
Studies have not been done to see if zinc intake below the RDA (too little) or at doses higher than the UL (too much)
can cause behavior or learning issues.
Breastfeeding while taking zinc:
Zinc is a normal part of breastmilk. The RDA for breastfeeding is different from pregnancy. See the chart below for the
Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) and a Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) of zinc while breastfeeding.
Recommended Daily Allowance
(RDA)
Upper Limit
(UL)
14 to 18 years old and
breastfeeding 13 mg per day 34 mg per day
19 years old or older and
breastfeeding 12 mg per day 40 mg per day
Zinc
September 1, 2023
page 3 of 3
People who do not eat meat or seafood, have had bariatric surgery (such as gastric bypass), have medical conditions
that might affect how their body absorbs nutrients (such as cancer, eating disorders, kidney disease, malabsorption, or
substance misuse), or have exposure to cigarette smoke, should talk with their healthcare providers about their
specific nutritional needs.
If a man takes zinc, could it affect fertility or increase the chance of birth defects?
A few studies have found that low zinc levels are linked to infertility (ability to get a woman pregnant). Zinc
supplementation might help to improve fertility for some men but not for others. It is not clear how too much zinc
would affect fertility. In general, exposures that fathers or sperm donors have are unlikely to increase the risks to a
partner’s pregnancy. For more information, please see the MotherToBaby fact sheet Paternal Exposures at
https://mothertobaby.org/fact-sheets/paternal-exposures-pregnancy/.
Please click here for references.
Questions? Call 866.626.6847 | Text 855.999.3525 | Email or Chat at MotherToBaby.org.
Disclaimer: MotherToBaby Fact Sheets are meant for general information purposes and should not replace the advice of your health care provider.
MotherToBaby is a service of the non-profit Organization of Teratology Information Specialists (OTIS). Copyright by OTIS, September 1, 2023.